Rating: 3/5

Not a great literary achievement, but, despite some reservations, I found it very enjoyable. The copy I have has a delightfully trashy cover, which set the tone for the beginning of the book, which is choke-filled with sex, oversized penises and male narcissism. It all seemed rather silly to begin with, but I found the quality of the story and dialogue to improve as I went on (even seemingly gratuitous details - such as Charlie’s XXXL penis - have their raison d’etre, it turns out). Indeed, as I read on I felt there were moments when the insight into the main characters’ psychology momentarily lifted the book to the level of literary fiction. 

There are a number of unpalatable things happening in the story. The main character, Charlie, is no role model, and remains deeply flawed until the very last pages of the novel. He is ridden with prejudice, all too inclined to violence (and that includes a couple of horrid episodes of sexual violence against women), weak and inconstant. Similarly, his grandmother is racist, homophobic, patronising, and manipulative. That the author somehow manages to build up such characters and still make you care for them (sometimes despite yourself) provides evidence of decent literary talent, at least on that score.

I read some reviews that argue that the book shows the prejudices of its era. I think that remark misses the point. For starters, those prejudices are still with us, even if their expression today is (thankfully) less widely acceptable. Besides, it’s not quite clear to me that the author condoned Charlie’s behaviour or prejuduces. Indeed, at the very beginning of the novel an aged (we must assume) Charlie, as he prepares to recount his story, deliberately chooses to speak in the third person to distance himself from his former (somewhat despicable) self. 

My main reason for enjoying the novel is that I found the love story relatable. Personally, if I were Peter, I would have stayed with Tim rather than go back to Charles, but that is beside the point. The point is that here you have men liable to fall head over heels for each other (at first sight, too), and serious about making it last. Not too bad, for a change.