Rating: 3/5

Utopia  is Thomas More's response to Plato's  The Republic . In Utopia, More introduces the "ideal society" through a fictitious state of the same name of which location is unclear. According to More, this ideal society is a model of equality and justice. There are gender equality and no class structure. The Utopian society enjoys shared living; all property and wealth are held in common. There are no private properties. There is a rigid structure of governance and conduct of society and every citizen follows them obediently, for there are severe punishments for disobedience. 

The state of Utopia is governed in accordance with communist and socialist ideals. It is quite interesting to note that the communist and socialist ideas that were advocated by Plato in his Republic were reiterated by a 16th-century British social philosopher, even more rigidly. And the fact is that it was written three-centuries ago the Communist Manifesto was written by Karl Marx which was the paving stone for the Communist States.

Thomas More was a prominent statesman. He once worked as an under-sheriff and knew the social disorder and inequality. He saw how the poor suffered and how the nobility and landed gentry abuse their labour. What he witnessed made him reflect on social reform and his own views found a voice through Utopia. One cannot, therefore, dismiss Utopia lightly as fictitious and imaginative. It is More's own reflections based on his own societal defects. But given the time period in which he lived in, it was suicidal to express these views publicly. So he creates Utopia and brings it to the public as an account which was narrated to him by a Portuguese traveler by the name of Raphael Hithloday. 

A major part of the book is dedicated to establishing equality, and this through by the introduction of a rigid structure. The motto seems to be equality and justice as whatever cost. The "cost" is liberty and freedom. However, some of the views expressed are noteworthy. More had been mindful of how little land was used by the nobles and gentry to cultivate thus by providing labour opportunities. Much of the land according to him were wasted on gardens and hunting grounds of which he was critical. There are also views expressed on religious tolerance. There was religious disharmony brewing in British society at the time, so he felt called upon to express liberal views on religion. As long as one accepts God and not advocate atheism, it was to be accepted as an individual right and tolerated. What is more surprising is More's liberal support on euthanasia! As a devoted catholic, Thomas More really surprised me there. 

I thought Utopia was a political satire, but it is not so. It is rather a political criticism and an advocacy for a better society. It is a fantastical state and even More while expressing his views had his doubts on achieving such status. Centuries later, we now see that that is impossible and that humans somehow value liberty and freedom more than equality.