Rating: 5/5

One of the bests.........

This is my third book by Chrsita Wolf and like the other two this one is also a "FIVE STAR" book.

What is it about?

It is the re-telling of a story that is universally well known - The Fall of Troy. The fall of Troy in this novel is narrated by King Priam's daughter/priestess, Cassandra who in her captivity is expecting the death. She was the one who saw Troy's fall from the beginning but sadly nobody believed her.

What makes it a great book? 

The reason is Christa Wolf and her narrative style. 

About her narrative Style: I may use the term: "FLASHBACK WITH A FLASHLIGHT". Christa Wolf is fond of mingling present and past. Initially, it might hinder the normal flowing reading process. But once a person gets used to it that will be pleasure. 

In Wolf's novels usually the primary character in its present time is portrayed as thinking back into the past and beginning to analyse each event with some revealing and striking reflections. That is why it is a FLASHBACK WITH A FLASH LIGHT. And the Flash light reveals many things. The shady characters, the dark events, the hidden skeletons and the impregnable inner core of persons reveal themselves to Wolf's Flash light.

For instance, in this book we get to know of many characters in a different colour. ( Two examples: Polyxena, the other daughter of King Priam who wanted to be the priestess is observed to be one who "punishes those she loved by ruining herself." Panthesilea, the woman warrior's motive is described as: "They kill whomever they love, love in order to kill.") Her observations on other characters, such as Achilles, Paris, King Priam, etc are all fantastic. These observations of characters make the well known story very fresh and new.

Wolf's 'Flash light observations' on war and other political activities/decisions relating to it are immeasurably relevant even to the present context. I think, she drew on her own experiences of war that she witnessed as a small girl in Germany. Her observations on war and war heroes are very chilling and she ends with a pessimistic observation, that the wars and their consequent human miseries will be for ever part of human history. In the novel, this is the observation Cassandra makes and sadly from her point of view the world and human history has not contradicted her till today.

If so, what are we to do today when we have 'peaceful situation' in our own region? Prepare for mourning? No. Christa Wolf answers: "This much I do know: there are gaps in time. This is one of them, here and now. We cannot let it pass without taking advantage of it."

As for me I do know one thing: "One who has not read Christa Wolf misses a lot."