Rating: 5/5

Too important to write a decent review so close to finishing.
A week passes – a little temporal distance to try and assess what it is that I have just read. An attempt to write a pertinent review.

How often have you read a book that shocks you so much that you have to leave off reading the book – that physically makes you if not sick but afraid, core-shocked as in ‘how-can-anyone-do-that?’ It’s rare that an author can reach that pitch to throw the reader out of their normal orbit into something that changes one’s calm and perspective. And what is it about national character that leavens a writing so much that the style becomes identified with nationality? These are the questions which I ask after finishing only my second book by the Austrian writer Elfriede Jelinek. The first, to which I could only offer a rather cursory review, was The Piano Teacher. It made a deep impression on me which I see I have totally failed to convey in my review. When something hits you that hard you take account of it, and though it’s taken me a while, Greed seemed like a decent choice to reacquaint myself with her work.

Elfriede Jelinek 

There is always this dialectic when you start a meaningful book; between the book, its contents and concepts and the author and their life/lives. And you cannot get away from this with Jelinek precisely because she IS controversial. Much is made of this in German-speaking Europe. But outside of that she appears to be little known or appraised even by the chattering classes that might be considered the clientele for her books. And this is even the case after being awarded the Nobel Laureate for Literature in 2004. A cursory look at her Wiki entry makes you begin to throw up the hands in a ‘Whoaa!’ moment. Dominant pushy mother (shades of The Piano Teacher there), severe anxiety overcome through writing, political involvement and awareness, committed feminist.

So what about Greed? Whether this is irony on the part of the author or the publishing company but the blurb on the back leads the casual buyer to believe that they are about to purchase a murder mystery set in the Austrian Alps. In a way that is precisely what they are getting but it is quite unlike anything the casual holiday reader would have ever picked up before and would never finish to be left lying lonely on the sun lounger (let’s face it – we all need that kind of mind opiate from time to time). The mere physical character of the writing will eradicate the majority of readers on the starting blocks – short (sometimes much longer), punchy paragraphs often seemingly unrelated to where the narrative (as such) has got to so far, such that each paragraph seems only related by association with an idea for which there are many asides and investigations of byways along the path. And then there are the increasing numbers of direct interjections from the writer to the reader. Do we take these as Jelinek’s direct appeals to us – as statements of her personal beliefs and intents, or are they more the thoughts of a writer writing about and in place of ‘a writer’ – someone outside the novel commentating. It is almost as if we are following the line of thought of an author exploring the very IDEA of a meaningless happenstance murder by a country policeman in the Styrian Alps (Jelinek’s childhood home) - branching, riffing, moving from one line to another, all connected in some way to a central thesis, yet separately stranded like a hemp rope that’s fraying. Everything stands for something else.

It is not an easy read. In fact it is closer to being a painful read – shocking, creeping up on you, slapping you in the face. Relentless. But it is brilliant in its form and composition – Joyce-ian, Beckett-like – real, true, modern fiction – a hyper-narrative. There is a real tenseness and brooding consciousness to the prose. It always feels that something is lurking behind the front, the tension building and building, as was the case with The Piano Teacher , till an explosive climax is reached. Even the environment feels threatening, hostile and unhealthy. The lake is dead. The mountain is hollow. Is she not out to just shock one awake? Does she have the right to inflict this pure anger upon us? Every paragraph seems like an exposition for you to examine, for you to cast your eye over, to make you engage in a considered moment with the text so that you are armed and ready for what is coming up in the following pages. All these crimes and misdemeanours. Are these people worthy of our respect as upright citizen defenders of a moral code which they can barely identify with in any case or about which they feel free enough to play around with the boundaries. Suggesting. Implying. STRONGLY suggesting. Here word stands for more than meaning, but also for its suggestion and alliteration, for its metonym, where praxis and poeisis meet. The pun always lurks there, playing with words, of one word leading to another suggesting another association which is taken up and run with till it takes us past the goal line and we catch up with ourselves going forward from the previous starting point; only now we have picked up a whole body of nuances suggested by but not inherent in the text itself.

Through these punchy paragraphs comes the themes that dominate Jelinek’s writing as a thinker, feminist and Austrian writer in the modern world. Women are at risk to all male violence. The heterosexual act is an act of aggression. We are all commodities bound into a world where commoditisation is dominant everywhere and in everything. Meaningless almost compulsive and subconscious acts of masochistic stupidity and inhumanity which become part and parcel of the human psyche through endless repetition and regurgitation. Death. Living Death. Mindless Living Death. The lust after external trappings which BECOME the persona. Objectification. And if you don’t pick up on any of these through the paragraphs the author lays out as ‘text’ then the author is there to speak directly to us with mini polemics which are her own counterblasts against modern life, her fellow Austrians and the dereliction of morality. She acutely observes the world around her and gives us rants against the petit bourgeois-ification of humanity as we befoul and devour everything everywhere. At times it becomes a pavane for dead nature and dead humanity by faceless characterless people which here are played by the country policeman and the people of Austria. Forget the murder of the teenager. This is desecration by a species of everything that the species has ever evolved into. People have given up looking because of so many past disappointments and this has led them to give up thinking. This is MISANTHROPE beyond anything you might think you can find in Balzac or Zola. This is misanthrope for the end of the world. She is outside the shower curtain slashing with the knife whilst we stand naked and defenceless. Its a rant and rail against everything but particularly about male brutality and female passivity. To have called it a counterblast is over-edging it really. It is water torture hammering away at you drip by drip - can you take it any more? Can you piece it all together? Who says its not a thriller or not about a murder? Of course it is, but 'not as we know it, Jim'. It DEMANDS engagement. It SCREAMS OUT for the intelligent and pursuant reader who is not taken in by spoon-fed plot and narrative. This is writing beyond writing. A smack in the face, when I say 'cunt', I mean 'cunt' kind of writing. A rebellion against the mundane. 

A depressing read then? Actually…. Quite the opposite. I could not put it down but I had to take the time to read each paragraph and digest the thoughts within these obtuse (at times) words strung together to make thoughts. It was if I was in direct communication with the author. It is a rare and special book that does this. And as an author – as a THINKING author meaning, wanting to change the world not just write about it, she has the perfect right to do this.

I begin to despair at the quality of READERSHIP…. not the quality of writing when I read some of the reviews of this book. It seems in the present day that it is not authors we lack that take the novel and literature to new places, new dimensions, beyond what has already been written, but we have instead a readership which wants just an opiate to dull their senses and fill a section of time with little more than quanta of mind pap; something that neither challenges the reader nor makes them think and explore concepts or to ask questions of their beliefs and attitudes and illuminate their behaviours. That anyone might consider giving this book less than five stars is quite beyond me and I do not consider myself a book snob. Proust bores me too.

A far more erudite and full review by Nicholas Spice can be found here in the pages of The London Review of Books (but I'm afraid it might be beyond a paywall.