Rating: 3/5

Green Henry is a classic realistic Bildungsroman. It's in parts autobiographical following the life of Heinrich Lee wanting to succeed as an artist. Not as a writer, as a landscape painter. Keller himself dabbled in landscape painting. More than one parallel between the author and his figure.

The book starts off with Heinrich leaving his Swiss hometown for Munich as a capital and place for artists to achieve fame and wealth. But quickly, the narrative changes, and for almost half of the book, we follow Heinrich's youth which he has written down in a diary. The narration shifts from third to first person for this part. We learn about his childhood, his first adventures as a teenager. But most important are two strands. 

The first one: his visits to the village of his parents where he falls in love with two very different women. The virginal Anna whom he swears allegiance to and the experienced womanly Judith. One for the soul, one for the body. Most telling about Heinrich is that he never has sex with any woman in this book, at all. He stands in his own way more than any external influence.

This is also true for the second important strand. His education as painter. From initial innocent efforts he grows up to more artistic but soulless technical paintings. Then, recognizing his mistake and finding a new teacher for whom's demise he feels responsible.

Suddenly, the story of his youth ends in the middle of book 3 with the final split from the two formative women while growing up. Two years later, Heinrich lives as a painter in Munich. Keller starts breaking the fourth wall repeatedly. Thoughts adapt to the wider environment, pondering on Germanic culture vs. the surrounding ones. The further the book progresses, Keller uses more time to express lengthy thoughts on almost any subject from faith to science, philosophy, law and politics.

On the whole, I enjoyed the book with its believable characters and its realistic approach which is a good contrast to other German books of the time drenched either in romantic clichés or nationalist sentiment. But I could have done without many of those elaborate thoughts as well as quite a few of scenes in which Keller goes into verbose details to explain even minor parts of Henry's bildung. Given these long descriptions, the end is astonishingly rushed, sudden and harsh. Especially in the first edition I read. Keller must have felt this way, too. In the second edition, he gives more room to the ending as well as a new chronological order for the narration.

If you are interested in literature of the 19th century, Green Henry might be for you. Otherwise, I'd consider it too much effort for not enough payback. Due to the time of its writing and its historical importance I still give 3*. Would be lower if it were from the 20th century.