Rating: 5/5

Michael A. Stackpole’s X-Wing: Wedge’s Gamble is the second in the lengthy series of Star Wars Legends novels focusing on the adventures of starpilot Wedge Antilles and the members of the squadrons under his command.

The premise of this story is somewhat credulity-stretching. Using the pilots of the most celebrated Rebel squadron as a ground-based intelligence gathering team seems a wildly irresponsible tactic from Ackbar et al., and I am not quite sure I buy it, for at least two reasons: 1. It deprives the Alliance of a crucial starfighter force at a time when they would have been in high demand; 2. Pilots are not necessarily the best people to identify high value targets, despite what the author would have us believe. Still, this plot device does allow the cast to get into lots of planet-bound intrigue and action, which gives a real change of pace from the starfighter combat of the previous novel.

Corran’s relationship with Erisi is still a little oddly handled - too much tell without showing, although the Kuati-noble-and-telbun charade during their insertion into Coruscant works well. Sure, Corran is an analytical type of guy, but his mental discussion with himself around the costs and benefits of starting a sexual relationship with her feels a little unnatural to me, and feel a bit like the author unconvincingly lecturing his young teen audience. Scenes with Mirax are much better, but that might just be that I prefer the smuggler daughter of a smuggler to the heiress to a hereditary industrial/feudal fortune. 

There is also the question of convenient plot coincidences. Coruscant is a city planet of many billion, perhaps trillion, beings. The odds of Corran spotting Kirtan Loor and Tycho Celchu by chance in an ecumenopolis like this are astronomically unlikely, as is his ‘by chance’ crashing a speeder bike into a building that just happens to be a Rebel safe house in which Wedge and the other Rogues are meeting. I guess this can be explained as the ‘will of the Force’, but I’d rather have a better reason! 

These are about the only negatives I can find about this novel, although of course your mileage my vary—especially if you have a low tolerance for pages-long descriptions of starfighter duels and gunfights. It is certainly pulpy, but I love this stuff as long as the plot is gripping, and this book continues on from the strong story begun in X-Wing: Rogue Squadron. 

The characters continue to be engaging, especially Coran and Wedge. The villains just get more villainous (especially Derricote), and I like the fact that Stackpole’s Imperials are not the incompetent buffoons that Kevin J. Anderson had begun characterising them as in the other Star Wars novels of the era. Ysanne Isard seems to be quite a masterful strategist, and a great antagonist. The character of Zekka Thyne was a bit wasted after all the build-up, but it made sense to deal with him in the way portrayed so as to not detract from the primary villains.

The post-Palpatine flavour of Coruscant was well evoked, especially since this was published in 1996, before the planet had ever been portrayed on screen—before even its short appearance in the Return of the Jedi special edition from 1997.

A couple of stray observations:

I’d forgotten how often Warlord Zsinj appeared as a background threat throughout the Rogue Squadron novels before becoming the primary antagonist in X-Wing: Iron Fist.

I had also totally forgotten about the minor character Portha the Trandoshan, and I look forward to finding out what (if anything) befalls him!

The discussion of interspecies sex is surprisingly deftly and sensitively covered for a book written in the 1990s. I certainly didn’t find it revolting like the relationship in Becky Chambers’ The Long Way to a Small Angry Planet, instead it comes across more like the Madame Vastra and Jenny relationship from the Matt Smith era of Doctor Who, i.e. not done for titillation, but as an exercise in exploring consent and civilised open-mindedness. Plus, it’s quite funny, which helps.