Rating: 3/5

Free download at Librivox. 
Roger Melin narrates. He is also referred to as Greg W.
The version here is translated into English by Lee M. Hollander.

Two kids, a brother and sister going home alone from their grandparents on Christmas Eve, get lost on a glacier up in the Austrian Alps!

This novella has a slow start. The background is being set. We learn how even neighboring villages are separated from each other by rugged terrain and climatic conditions. Each must be self-sufficient, and so it has always been. A church, a school, a shoemaker, a dyer and tannery and small farms typify the villages. All in the village know each other. Most born in any given village stay there their entire lives. The parents of the two children broke away from the norm. They chose a spouse from a neighboring village, and so this is how it came to be that the two grandchildren at Christmas were visiting grandparents across a mountain pass. On the way home it snowed and snowed more and more. That they lost their way is not strange.

The story picks up when the children get lost. The descriptive nature of their experience high in the mountains is both beautiful and frightening. The atmosphere pervading village life is also well drawn. In a way, what is told reads as a fairy tale. We are swallowed up in a mystical, magical bubble from the past. You cannot, should not judge the tale objectively. If you do, it falls apart. That the two children are brought home safely is scarcely believable!

We see how the villages and their respective inhabitants come closer together. With this the author relays a message--both heartwarming and valuable. There is also reference to God and faith. 

I like the atmospheric tone of the novel. I am not religious and too much of a realist to find the story credible. Three stars is my rating—I like it, but it did not wow me.

The narration by Roger Melin is better than most at Librivox. He reads well. Keep an eye out for him. Three stars for the audio narration as well as the story itself.