Rating: 5/5

How many today read utopias - and their opposite: dystopias - without worrying that one day, amid the Renaissance, a humanist named Thomas More wrote this story, whose title has become so familiar that it forgets from where it comes? It is the ransom of some writers to abandon bits of their work or themselves to everyday language.
The Utopia of More is the search for a harmonious and moral society. It bears the mark of its author's rigorism - a rigorism that earned him beheading for refusing to take an oath to an act of the English Parliament that rejected the Pope's authority - and bears no resemblance to the libertarian utopias of the second half. Of the XXth century. Please make no mistake: you can't enjoy yourself unhindered in paradise!
Thus, this original utopia, inspired by ancient texts, including Plato's ideal city, has its limits, prescribed by its laws, like all those that will follow. Because we had understood that utopia is an "imaginary country where an ideal government reigns over a happy people," it does not consider the reality of the multiple worlds and their particularities. Said utopia of More appears in many ways as a tyranny of happiness and isolationism at will. According to the founder of the island of utopia, to live happily, let's live in hiding, which is a utopia! As proof, it is a navigator who reveals, after having discovered it, the island's existence, that is to say, a man who seeks new horizons, which is inhuman "nature."
The Utopia of Thomas More had the ambition, through fiction, to propose this famous ideal government that men seek. However, it is understood that the ideal of the neighbor is not mine; this makes it difficult, in reality, to achieve a utopian consensus, as society is comprised of individuals who make agreements and disagreements. Would it then be an impossible dream if there were a dream?
Beyond these political considerations, the author may not have foreseen that his text would become the first stone of a literary genre that has continued to grow and multiply since. Therein lies the genius of More, to create a coherent imaginary world hidden from the world's disorders: a whole romantic program!
That's a disturbing fluidity work written five centuries ago and constitutive of Western culture.