Rating: 4/5

This was Nobel-prize-winner Boll’s first novel was not published when he wrote it in 1950, but in 1992, with an English translation in 1994. Boll had mined the work for use in later works. 

Hans, a deserter from the German army at the end of World War II, returns to his home town. He is delivering a dead soldier’s coat to his widow. The will that is sewn into its lining is central to the core of the story. The dead soldier had been well off and his family would rather not face having to share his estate with his widow. After seeking food and help in finding the widow at a Catholic Church, Hans makes the acquaintance of a woman whose child died when Americans invaded the city. They become lovers.

Heinrich Böll - image from The Irish Times 

Hans struggles with issues of physical survival and moral clarity. Bread is a central image. Sustenance can be both physical and moral. Hans seeks food when we first meet him, but the church that feeds him physically becomes a source of moral sustenance as well. In one unsubtle reference, the priest gives Hans not only bread but a bottle of wine as well. (elements of Catholic communion). Hans ultimately returns to the church wholly.

Boll’s bleak, rubble-strewn, postwar landscape is busy with references to light and dark. Almost every page makes some use of darkness, or sun. The ruins here are not only of the unnamed city but of the characters’ lives. Hans has lost his young wife. A grieving mother has lost her baby. Another young woman is on her deathbed. A man is losing his adult daughter. 

Identification is primary here as well. Hans is traveling with forged papers, gets more false papers. Who is he really? What will he will himself to be?

Time heals wounds, or does it?
  The date of the destruction of any particular ruin could be determined by its overgrowth: it was a question of botany. This heap of rubble was naked and barred, raw stone, newly broken masonry, piled thickly, violently, with iron beams jutting out, sowing scarcely a spot of rust. There wasn’t a blade of grass to be seen; while in other places trees were already growing, charming little trees in bedrooms and kitchens, close by the rusty shell of the burned-out stove.
 People struggle with growing, accepting, moving on.
  She was secretly cursing the sudden impulse that had led her to clean the room. Where had it come from? She didn’t know. The desire for order and cleanliness was totally new, and she knew that it was senseless. Everything had seemed cleaner before: spots and ugly circles were now visible where she had damp-mopped the floor, ancient ground-in chalk that hadn’t been noticeable before. All her efforts had served only to reveal a strange, transparent film of repulsive stains that appeared ineradicable…an infinite expanse of dirt appeared that now threw her into despair, and against which all struggle was useless. 
 

I was much taken with Boll’s rich use of language. Reading The Silent Angel was like eating a torte, dense, filling. I found that I thought about the book after I had read it much more than is usual for me. Potent imagery plus evocative language, plus moral substance equals a pretty good read.