Rating: 3/5

Clive Cussler's Atlantis Found certainly makes for an interesting read, if not a somewhat heavyhanded one. On one hand, you have a plot for the ages, filled with intrigue, suspense, violence and mysticism. On the other hand, the style of writing is filled with unclear terminology, unrealistic speaking styles and a plot led by a hero who's abilities are just too far overstated to even be considered plausible in any reality. Don't let this get you down though, as the excellent plot still more than makes up for a few minor issues in writing.

The book starts by describing a disasterous comet impact on Earth 9,000 years ago and the impact that it had on the life, continents, and an apparently worldwide human empire whose destruction spawned the legends of Atlantis as well as those of the Great Flood. Several thousand years later, a 19th century whaling vessel gets stuck in the ice of Antarctica and discovers a ship trapped almost a century earlier containing a treasure trove of bizarre artifacts, oddly none of which are made of valuable metals, and an incredible obsidian skull which the captain takes before the ship collapses into the ice. Finally in modern day, an archaeological expedition finds a bizarre perfect cubic room in a mountain in Colorado, when they are attacked by a mysterious group of armed men. Fortunately, they are saved by a National Underwater and Marine Agency agent named Dirk Pitt, who is able to bring them to safety and capture one of the enemy agents who had been masquerading around as one of the archaeologists. Unfortunately, the agent is found and killed shortly after while in custody. As the story progresses, the plot splits off in several directions with a group of NUMA agents searching for evidence of the ancient culture on an isolated island, some researchers trying to decipher the ancient language and threats of doom, and the eponymous hero searching for the old vessel in the arctic, and through the discovery of the cause of the demise of the ancient civilization and failed attacks on both search teams by a strike team on the island and an advanced WWII era U-Boat in the Antarctic, the agency discovers that it may be in for one hell of a fight. Eventually tracing the attacks back to a fleet of superships and a corporate empire formed after the fall of the Third Reich and led by what would appear to be the cloned Aryan offspring of Hitler, they realize the group's intentions: to ride out the apocalypse and repopulate the Earth under the rule of the Fourth Reich. This confounds NUMA as they discover that the legend of a returning comet is in fact not a threat and that the Fourth Reich plans on starting the end by using nanotechnology to sink the Ross Ice Shelf, reversing the poles and flooding the planet. Through a journey across the ice, the commandeering of Admiral Byrd's famous ice crawler, a meeting with Cussler himself, and the climactic battle for a Nazi base in an ancient city, the group of agents is able to barely save the world and doom the antagonistic Wolf family to certain death. After a final battle with what remains of the Fourth Reich which leads the groups plane through the streets of D.C., the heros finally meet with the president as well as their friends, colleagues and Pitt's romantic involvement.

This was certainly an excellent book in the fact that it had an amazing plot and even more so in the sense of a more than complete backstory of events. The writer clearly spent a large amount of time researching everything from legends and creation/disaster stories, to data of ancient cataclysms and their effects on the Earth, to occult beliefs, clandestine actions and eventual evacuation and hiding of wealth and personnel by the Third Reich. Every part of the plot is just fantastic: the extremely consise descriptions of the Amenes civilization, the Nazi ark fleet and plans to sink the Ross Ice Shelf, and even the subplot of the Wolf family being the genetically modified clones of Hitler all lead to a fantastic journey. Despite some overdone and occasionally unrealistic writing styles, this story is still fascinating and a must for anyone looking for a good action-packed, end of the world, Nazi fighting thrillride.