Rating: 4/5

4.5 stars

“Somewhere between fear and sex passion is. Passion is not so much an emotion as a destiny.”

Reading Jeanette Winterson’s prose is like soaking in the most luxurious bath. It’s warm and sensuous and leaves me feeling a bit light-headed once I’ve finished. It’s difficult to describe her writing. The one word that comes to mind immediately is magical. Of the four pieces I’ve read so far, the plot seems secondary to the prose, until I’ve finished. Then all of a sudden I’m able to see the beautiful tapestry she’s woven together. I nearly always start at the beginning and read through all the wondrous phrases I’ve highlighted all over again. And there are plenty of them! This is a story about passion and love in all its various forms, beginning with the Napoleonic Wars and the love of a country for its hero.

“He was in love with himself and France joined in. It was a romance. Perhaps all romance is like that; not a contract between equal parties but an explosion of dreams and desires that can find no outlet in everyday life.”

Henri set off to war hoping to become a drummer. What he became instead was Bonaparte’s personal waiter. He follows this godlike figure faithfully, like the rest of his compatriots. His best friends include a diminutive groomsman and a defrocked priest. Eventually time reveals to Henri the blinders he’s worn for eight years, following a leader who perhaps wasn’t all he appeared to be at first. His illusions are crushed under the frigid snows of Russia. 

“It’s the heart that betrays us, makes us weep, makes us bury our friends when we should be marching ahead. It’s the heart that sickens us at night and makes us hate who we are. It’s the heart that sings old songs and brings memories of warm days and makes us waver at another mile, another smouldering village… You can’t make sense of your passion for life in the face of death, you can only give up your passion. Only then can you begin to survive.”

Villanelle is the enchanting daughter of a Venetian boatman, working the casinos of this otherworldly city. She dresses as a boy to please the patrons of the gambling floor while assisting the dealers and lifting the wallets of the unsuspecting on the side. A dangerous love affair eventually catches up to her and Villanelle is the one that finds something precious has been stolen from her. 

“How is it that one day life is orderly and you are content, a little cynical perhaps but on the whole just so, and then without warning you find the solid floor is a trapdoor and you are now in another place whose geography is uncertain and whose customs are strange?... Somewhere between fear and sex. Somewhere between God and the Devil passion is and the way there is sudden and the way back is worse.”

Fate brings these two compelling characters together where their stories are shared and a deep friendship blooms. A bond is created between two lives and two very different backgrounds. What is one to do when a heart is lost to another that doesn’t return love in the same fashion? The pain is palpable and exquisitely written. The setting of Venice with its labyrinthine waterways and the island of the dead evokes an even more surreal feeling to the whole piece.

I adore Jeanette Winterson and her stories! I really can’t get enough of them. Written on the Body is my favorite so far, but this very nearly reaches the same level as that one for me. Highly recommended.

“Love, they say, enslaves and passion is a demon and many have been lost for love. I know this is true, but I know too that without love we grope the tunnels of our lives and never see the sun. When I fell in love it was as though I looked into a mirror for the first time and saw myself.”