Rating: 1/5

This was terrible. I initially was hoping that this would improve upon the previous novel, but nope, it went straight in the other direction. There's countless things to complain about, pal. I can't think of only a few things to single out, pal. One thing I found annoying as hell is how Crispin keeps making Han say pal every time he's speaking to Chewie, pal. She did the same thing when Han spoke with Muuurgh in the previous novel, but it's even worse in this one, pal. Harrison Ford never said pal this much, pal. No human has ever spoken like this, pal. It's abysmally poor writing, pal. Speaking of Chewbacca, it's a crime that Han meeting/saving Chewbacca is completely glossed over, told to us in brief recap at the start of this story. That should be one of the main focuses of this entire trilogy! But I know that Crispin was under strict guidelines from Lucasfilm on what she could and could not write about, and Han's time at the Imperial Academy and how he saved Chewbacca were specifically some of the things she was not allowed to go into detail about. What an utter disappointment.

Way too many characters show up in this novel. Almost all of them are from other Expanded Universe novels and comics, and most of them hardly serve any purpose here. They're just being mentioned for the sake of being mentioned. It felt like a fanfic author being overly excited to include other fanfic authors' original characters.

On top of that, movie characters are included for mostly no reason as well. Boba Fett shows up to try and bring in Han on a bounty, and injects Han with some sort of mind control drug that makes the victim obediently follow any command (really fucking dumb as hell concept). But then Lando shows up literally out of nowhere, gets the drop on Fett (which is completely nonsensical), and they then inject Fett with the drug and force him to leave. And that's it. Fett is later paid off by Jabba to stop hunting down Han, but between that event and the event described above, he never tried to capture Han again for some unexplained reason. It was completely pointless. Han and Lando's meeting was very forced and made little sense. The reason she comes up with is that Lando wants someone to teach him how to pilot his newly acquired Millennium Falcon, and he heard that Han is a good pilot. In an entire galaxy filled with capable pilots, he just so happens to single out Han, and also happens to catch up with him right when Han needs saving. This is ludicrously stupid. It's nice that we get to see their friendship begin and develop, but she should've come up with a more believable way for them to initially meet than this. To make everything worse, Darth Vader himself makes a highly improbable cameo at the end of the story, coming very close to crossing paths with Han. It's dumb as hell and should not have been included.

Speaking of the movies - remember when Darth Vader told the group of bounty hunters "no disintegrations" in The Empire Strikes Back? Well, Crispin has apparently decided that instead of just being a one-off thing Vader says there, it's actually common bounty hunter parlance. Because she writes it over and over again in this book. It's said no less than half a dozen times in regards to the bounty on Han. It truly is emblematic of the worst aspects of the Expanded Universe - taking minute details from the films and harping on it over and over again, because they want to you get excited and go "look! look! that thing from the movies oh my god!" It's rather pathetic. It was only ever a line of dialogue, guys, come on. You don't need to turn it into something important.

There's simply too much pointless "romance" in this trilogy. This book takes place 5 years after the first book, yet both Han and Bria are pining for each other, even after all that time. They were in a 4-month relationship when they were 19 and 17 respectively, and it's now 5 years later. They would not still be this caught up over one another. It's ridiculous. On top of that, though, Han gets two other women who instantly become attracted to/interested in him, for no good reason. Han goes to a show and sees a performance from stage magician Xaverri, and immediately decides that he just has to get to know her, apropos of nothing. Later, once that relationship ends, Han sees a woman defend herself in a bar, and just decides that he has to go insert himself into the situation so he can learn more about the woman, and it goes from there. Then, towards the end, both of these women meet each other, and they're both cool with the fact that they all like Han. It's really dumb and does not serve the story in any way. Crispin just really wanted to be writing a YA romance novel, but she wasn't.

The passage of time in this story seems really random and arbitrary. It also happens without much preamble, and gets confusing. At different points in the story, 5 months pass, 2 weeks pass, 2 months pass, 3 months pass, 6 months pass, and perhaps more I'm missing. It will happen abruptly, with one paragraph in the middle of a chapter briefly stating that 5 months passed, just like that. It's a very strange way to structure a story. It's not good!

Seeing as all three of these novels were published within months of each other (the entire trilogy came out in less than one year), I'm assuming that Crispin was under a massive time crunch. It really shows during this novel. A lot of things felt both rushed and like they were padding out a flimsy story. Perhaps the start and the finish will be stronger, and it was just this middle book that was weak. My hopes are not high.
Scrolling through all the other reviews, I am a bit surprised to see so many high ratings and praise. Not that I expected much different, but people seem to really love this. I wonder if I had read this when I was young, if I would have a different opinion (mainly tinted by nostalgia) about this. Perhaps the nostalgia would curb my critical thinking. But I have no background with it, and think it's awful.

I'll be starting the third book, but then pausing it to read the Brian Daley Han Solo Adventures when they come up in the story. I am interested to see how those play out.