Rating: 4/5

A couple of months ago I read a non-fiction account of an air-raid against my hometown during World War II. The book ("Ploesti" by James Duggan) whetted my apetite for other similar accounts from that conflagration. Being already familiar with the two famous novels by Cornelius Ryan ("The Longest Day" and "A Bridge Too Far") I turned my attention to the Eastern front and to what is arguably the deciding battle of the whole conflict:

 Marked by constant close quarters combat and direct assaults on civilians by air raids, it is often regarded as one of the single largest (nearly 2.2 million personnel) and bloodiest (1.7–2 million wounded, killed or captured) battles in the history of warfare. The heavy losses inflicted on the German Wehrmacht make it arguably the most strategically decisive battle of the whole war. It was a turning point in the European theatre of World War II; German forces never regained the initiative in the East and withdrew a vast military force from the West to replace their losses.  [source: wikipedia]

The title was familiar from a movie I watched years ago, but the novel has very little to do with the Hollywood adaptation. I have some reservations about the treatment of the subject by William Craig, and I will try to detail them later, but these complaints should be balanced by the fact that the book kept me glued to the pages for two white nights in a row, in the middle of a working week. That says something both about the importance, the appeal of the subject and about the manner in which the author mixed historical detail with human interest stories. For every description of the units deployed, of their tactics and of the equipment they used in battle, there was an even lengthier look at the real people involved in the actual fighting, military or civilians caught in the crossfire. For every panoramic outlook of the war, played in the high offices of Kremlin or Berlin, there was a scene from the devastated streets and buildings of the town of Stalingrad. The reader cannot help being sucked in into the terrible Maelstrom of urban warfare, when whole regiments were wiped out within hours of entering the battle, where disputed territory was measured in yards or in different levels of the same building that changed hands several times in one day.

The is a "but" though, and it has to to with a subtle yet persistent impression that the author is more interested in the professionalism and personal heroism of the German troops rather than in the sacrifices and dedication of the Russian defenders. The sections dealing with the Wehrmacht are about twice the length of those dealing with the Soviets, and most of the comments are either positive or complimentary towards the Germans. Craig even finds excusable circumstances for the poor decisions taken by Von Paulus, who was admittedly under strict orders from the Fuhrer and not a free agent. While the author doesn't shy away from the atrocities perpetrated by both sides, especially the sustained bombing of the city by the the Luftwafe and the punishment of deserters by the Russians, the overall impression for me is still one of an apologist rather than a critic of the Nazis. An objective reason for the preponderence of information from the German side can be found in the secrecy and propaganda that the Russians used in their later accounts of the battle and the difficulty of an American historian to penetrate the Soviet archives, but even so, after five years of intensive research he did for the book, I would have expected William Craig to be more balanced.

On a personal note, the battle of Stalingrad is of particular interest for Romanians, because it caused the almost total destruction of our regular national army. Two Romanina Army corps were deployed to guard the flanks of the battlefront, assisted by other satellite nations like the Italians and the Hungarians. Despite frequent intelligence reports that the Roussians were amassing troops for a counteroffensive and that the Romanian armies were poorly equipped and stressed thin on a very long front, Von Paulus preferred to concentrate all his efforts on the town itself. When the breakthrough came, it was exactly through the Romanian sectors, who had nothing to counter tanks and heavy artillery. They were treated and they died like cannon fodder. Von Paulus ended up surrounded and eventually became the first Field Marshall to surrender his army. A second tidbit of information of local relevance is that the same Von Paulus was married with a Romanian lady connected with the Romanian aristocracy, a wife that was much less enamored of Hitler than her husband:

 Paulus was awed by Hitler's grasp of the technical aspects of warfare. He considered him a genius.
His wife did not share his beliefs. The former Elena Constance Rosetti-Solescu, Coca to her friends, a descendant of one of Romania's royal houses, had married Paulus in 1912 and gave him a daughter and twin sons. 

The most famous incident in the Stalingrad siege is the subject of the movie of the same name : "Enemy at the Gates", with Jude Law playing the role of the Russian sniper Vasily Zaytsev. In the book, the events from the film occupy only a few pages from the middle of the battle, and a mention in the afterword. Zaytsev may be the most celebrated hero of the Stalingrad conflict, but Craig does a good job of cutting Zaytsev down to size from the myth created around him, and of making it clear he is only one many soldiers that fought and died in those days, often remaining unnamed or forgotten. For me, the one name that stuck is that of Lt. Hersch Gurewicz, an unlucky grunt who gets injured and blown to pieces time and time again, yet refuses to give up and returns to the frontline after each lengthy hospital stay.

Conclusion: A very well documented account of one of the greatest battles of WWII, a true page turner that excells in the human interest stories from the actual participants in the conflict.