Rating: 5/5

If a topic is so comprehensive, each short story, as in this case, has the potential for a whole Netflix, amazon prime or facebook watch series with a movie and video game.
 
Now the topic of robot rights and ethic will become a real subject to deal with, probably beginning in the most enthusiastic countries in this field, such as Japan and Korea. Yes, other countries build nice robots too, but they have mentalities and beliefs that don´t integrate living things in their mental superstructure. So the first few cases, when a perfect, conscious AI gets transformed into a robot body, maybe the beginning of a whole new societal structure. Many questions will arise.
 
When and how to give them human general rights, voting rights, the right to reproduce.
How to deal with humans who still want to work, even if it is not necessary anymore? If it is more expensive for each company and the state to let a slow and error-prone human do the job.
What if humans and robots fall in love and want to have kids that are hybrids or cyborgs? With these descendants, the same series of questions as with the robots occurs again.
If cold, artificial structures get rights, depending on their intelligence and sentience, what should be done with all the tortured and enslaved animals? That domestic cattle isn´t happy lies on the hand, but what if cats and dogs get technology to express their opinions and have nothing more to say than: "We had to do what you wanted and got Stockholm syndrome or simulated joy cause we had no other option. Free us, we want to build our own state."
 
There are so many options on the table, because each culture, depending on its development level, will deal with it in another way. 
 
One always interesting question is: Will they become evil by themselves as we did? As soon as they realize that manipulation and the will and ability to hurt and kill others brings power, will they go our way? I believe yes, cause each intelligent species soon recognized the evolutionary advantage of being a villain. And a mind needs certain freedoms to function so that it can´t be created with so many restrictions to avoid this classic dilemma. But hey, we are potential monsters too, so what else should we expect from the life that we create.

Tropes show how literature is made and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique:
https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...