Rating: 5/5

Seeing the world develop in a more and more bizarre direction, I remember our high school performance of Max Frisch's Andorra. 

Why? What made my mind dig out that memory? I hadn't thought of the play in two decades, and my copy of it is still with my parents, on a dusty bookshelf in a house in another country. And now, all of a sudden, I feel the urgent need to reread it. There is no copy of it in our local bookstore, and the small community library didn't have one either - even though I checked for Swedish, English and German versions.

Why does it haunt me so?

It is a drama about prejudice, and about how external perception of an individual's identity shapes human life. A parable on everyday evil in small, narrow-minded communities, carelessly jeopardising the happiness and safety of individuals to protect their own worldview, and to hide their secrets by spreading false rumours. It is a drama about antisemitism, but it could equally well be one about racism, or gender, or sexual orientation, or whatever else the ignorant, intolerant majority in mainstream societies is afraid to face or compete with. 

It is a parable of all people who are forced into the role of being different, so that others can feel that they belong.

I remember the performance, and our strong feelings against the "justifications", when the village people explain why they are not to be blamed for the tragedy, even after the main character, Andri, is deported and killed. Nobody is guilty, everyone has perfectly understandable reasons for not speaking up against the prejudice and evil of society as a whole. 

It was scary to perform those ideas, and we - young, idealistic, full of belief in our own integrity - said that it could never happen in real life again. People had started to be honest, to face history, to learn from the horrors of the Holocaust. Nobody would be fooled or bullied into accepting ostracism as a normal state of mind.

I remember that we were appalled at the very essence of prejudice shown in the play: Andri is not really a Jew, but identifies with their fate after having been pushed into the role by the behaviour of the villagers. In the end, his identity is what he has experienced, not the sum of his biological roots. His socialisation - not his biology - determines his choice of belonging. 

What we rejected as young students was the premise of the play: that the tragedy lies in the false accusation. Our young hearts bled because we thought it should not matter what Andri's origin was: ostracism should be challenged in any case, whether Andri was Jewish or not. The tragedy should have been that there was a distinction between Jews and others in the first place.

Prejudice should - and could - be abolished, we thought. The spreading of FALSE rumours was just icing on the poisonous cake.

Now I think the play is spot on. It IS the spreading of rumours, of fear and propaganda, that starts the evil machinery. All of a sudden, truth and falsehood are negotiable, a matter of personal interpretation and opinion, and "freedom of speech" - without accountability - delivers the platform for hatred. 

Three quotes still ring in my ears, after two decades:

"Und plötzlich bist du so wie sie sagen. (And all of a sudden, you are just like they say)" 

- You can't really escape the opinions of the community in which you live. If they have preconceived ideas about who you are and what you are likely to do, it will shape you, one way or the other.

"Ich kenne den Jud. Die Wahrheit wird man in Andorra wohl noch sagen dürfen. (I know the Jew. You should still be allowed to speak the truth in Andorra.)"

- Under the pretext of "telling the truth", any prejudice is tolerated, even encouraged. But what kind of truth is that? And what does it do to objective evaluation of facts? If the "alternative" truth is emotionally felt to be right, evidence to the contrary will lose importance - as long as both methods of "truth-finding" are equally acceptable means to judge a situation. 

"Wieso seid ihr stärker als die Wahrheit? (Why are you stronger than truth?)"

That is a question I can't answer. Why? Why are so many people willing to let hatred take over and guide their judgment? Why is truth a negotiable good bought by the powerful and used against minorities? 

Why?

I think it is about time to set up school performances of Andorra again. For we are Andorra. And it is our choice what we do to Andri. And who we blame.