Rating: 5/5

Probably one of the best novels I ever read, better even than The English Patient. Here I am, reading it again ...

This isn’t so much a plot-based novel as an atmospheric and dreamlike weaving of many intersecting stories that are set in Toronto in the early part of the 20th century; a kind of magical fable about the workers who built the city - and, it seems, inspired by extensive photographs and newspaper articles about the construction of the Bloor viaduct and Toronto’s art-deco Waterworks.

Most of the characters are from immigrant communities – Italian, Finnish, Macedonian – although the book opens and closes with Patrick Lewis a Canadian, who is if anything, more isolated from his roots than the immigrants. 

The entire story is in fact a tale that Patrick relates to Hana, a girl he has cared for since her mother -Patrick’s lover Alice – died, as they drive through the night to a northern Ontario town to rescue Clara, a former lover and sometime friend of Alice …
That story in turn involves Ambrose Small, a millionaire who disappeared, his lover Clara, and Patrick’s quest to track him down for a bounty, resulting in an attempt on Patrick’s life …
Alice was formerly a nun who fell off the viaduct (this actually happened) and is caught by Nicholas Temelcoff, a bridge construction worker of legendary ability; he later becomes a baker and is closely involved in Hana’s life …
Then there is Caravaggio the thief, painted blue to become invisible against the sky in a daring escape from prison; Patrick had saved his life in prison – and why was he there? Because he was caught after burning down an exclusive resort in the Muskokas, an act of rebellion in the class war that’s a subtext of this story …
And as part of that war, Caravaggio and Patrick, an expert dynamiter, hatch a plot to break into and blow up the Waterworks via the intake tunnel under Lake Ontario – a tunnel that Patrick helped build – but in the end Patrick is persuaded to abandon the plan …

It sounds disjointed written down like that but In the Skin of a Lion is truly hypnotic to experience. I first read this over 30 years ago, it’s been on my re-read shelf ever since and I would lovingly, greedily, read it again.