Rating: 4/5

Now a novel which includes Cleopatra (VII) and Ramses II, the greatest pharaoh in history has a certain amount of intrinsic interest, especially the Egyptian queen ( with little native blood, almost all Greek) when she plays one of the evil ones. Not a beauty as portrayed in films but attractive, intelligent and a bold capable ruler....Multimillionaire Lawrence Stratford in 1914, unearths his most important discovery the mummy of Ramses south of the capital; however this cannot be since he is in the Egyptian Museum in Cairo, the mystery slowly unravels like our supposedly dead friend's wrappings. Any person who has seen a film about these poor creatures knows the chilling scene: Strange noises heard, the grotesque thing starts to vibrate, eyes staring coldly then it moves inch by inch until the helpless humans, still breathing notice and runs for their lives. Some people's relatives are greedy and will commit any crime to get money, such is unstable Henry Stratford the dissolute nephew of this gentleman, gambling away a fortune, drinking anything in reach and fast women not very quick, yet he is nevertheless his brother's son... A preposterous narrative unfolds how Ramses was given an elixir by a foreign witch that grants him immortality; pretends to die at the age of 90 after a reign of 66 years, roams the world gets bored and has himself buried alive back in Egypt. What dreams he has....centuries of vague pictures viewed and unending, horrific unexplained things, deformed nebulous events. .Awakening a thousand years after internment sees Cleopatra's glorious face, then soon Mark Antony arrives in Alexandria. Back to the mummy's sarcophagus and modern times quick automobiles, flying airplanes, telephones which speak until they become rather tiresome to the listener, 
 monstrous trains loud guns weird clothes and odd customs. Add a few murders, stir some intrigues and a complicated plot a little spice for seasoning passionate love making, Mr. Stratford's pretty daughter Julie has a lot of admirers no surprise she becomes smitten by Ramses the Great and the tale becomes clearer...but the sequel follows so leave a dangling conclusion. This book has many good qualities, yet not enough for it rise above the ordinary just another action adventure story one of countless , if it only stayed on the narrow path and not become unfocused, less is more.