Rating: 5/5

I guess the question one needs to ask is not, why Elfriede Jelinek doesn’t handle subjects other than emotional exploitation, male sexual violation and middle age loneliness, rather it should be how many writers are capable of handling these things like she does. A man made useless lake, the lake is cold, no aquatic animals live there, nothing grows apart from weeds, it gets a ripple sometimes like the times when a dead body is thrown, it can’t hold that for long either, it returns that body to its surface after a few days as a riddle to be solved. Now, this lake could be symbolic and represent women beyond certain age. Her feminism is so base and pessimistic, Ms. Jelinek would have been irrevocably labeled as misogynist if she were a man.

I had a hard time getting through this book, had to take a break every six or seven pages, many times I had to go back reading previous two lines for every single line. Sometime a block of prose, a paragraph, went on for pages. I counted one going on for thirteen pages. To put things into perspective, ’The Brothers Karamazov’ I had been reading in parallel looked like a child’s play with its theological mutations and everything, so does Virginia Woolf’s stream of consciousness. This freaking thing has brought back my reading OCD to the surface again, now I have to find a way to deal with that shit.

Instead of finding faults at inadequate translation, one needs to appreciate the hard work done by Martin Chalmers in translating such an intense, poetical prose. Definitely it wouldn’t have been an easy job, like those Japanese trucks made during WWII, by reverse-engineering a Bantam Jeep. Those Japs did a good job and kept on improvising it, rest of the world started buying those 4x4s a lot as well. Elfriede Jelinek is such a market dud in English speaking countries, even a Nobel win didn’t help much. No, I am not talking about those hundred thousand copies of already translated works. ‘The Children of the Dead’, her supposedly magnum opus, doesn’t have an English version yet.

Bottomline. Definitely not an accessible Jelinek, strictly for her fans only!