Rating: 5/5

I'd like to write about this work (Once Again for Thucydides) against the background of Gen A.I. frenzy in year 2025. Seemingly a brief eye-witness accounts of natural phenomena in various parts of the world (What Handke calls "epopee" or "micro-epics,") this literary piece is a testimony to unique human sensibility in art form that the machine, however well-trained and however gargantuan its size of the memory, can never match up to.

Although what Handke seems to write about is the "description" of natural (or sometimes cultural) phenomena, his writing is indeed about the "event," and this is how machine writing and human writing may differ. For human, writing itself is an event. I can't quite recall if it was Handke who said "Every sentence has to be an event," and this description vs. event has incomparable contrast mainly due to what could be called "human attunement" to the world, (gripped by the world, in Heideggerian sense) the symbiotic relationship with human and the world that every unique sensibility and experience could bestow different perspective and interpretation at varying moments. For the machine, it is always one and the same, and the variant outputs actually do not come from such change in "attunement" but from its random permutations.

How Handke writes about certain "events" of the natural phenomena, such as doves flying, snow falling, thunders roaring, glowworms glowing, cannot be replicated by the machine, because what Handke is going through at the moment (and such moment can be split into infinite number of infinitesimal moments) endows his writerly events. For the machines like chatbots, writing could never be an event, writing cannot become an event, cannot describe an event, but it is merely an output as a description, a reply to a prompt, something static. However, a human writing, every human writing, is an event, and it refers to a human's unique "attunement" to the world.

Handke wrote micro-epics; machines could never write an epic, which is full of "events." Yes, in this age of A.I., epics are disappearing.

Handke was prescient; his novels, often painfully slow and without a story arc, urge the readers to slow down in this era of acceleration. This novel, Once Again for Thucydides, is an ultimate testimony to the value of human writing in this era of A.I.

--------------------------------------------------------

Were those flocks of birds in the crannies of the sink-hole walls also pigeons, illuminating its depths with their bright wings? Similarly, a single white butterfly's wobbling search for its mate intensified the green darkness under the chestnut trees. Meanwhile, waiting passengers (who had become quite numerous) stood around under the pigeons' din like a collection of unnecessary things.

The dark berries, fallen from the palm trees into puddles left by the afternoon's winter rain, formed a large archipelago that shone in the sun.

A single world of snowflakes spindled slowly on the breezes over the entire land. In the distance, especially near the dark forest edges, it fell wildly, as it did right at the train window. Only in the middle ground, where it was most easily discerned, did it fall with an almost primordial slowness.

I knew then that fulfillment--or, the right things--consisted of such hours. Yet, if I had had to stand before someone and portray it, I would have had nothing to say. I stuck my feet in the freshly melted stream in Llivia and thought, "Up and onwards!"

A small blue butterfly landed on one of the tracks, shining in the sun, and turned in a half circle as if moved by the heat, and the children of Izieux screamed to the heavens, almost a half century after their deportation, but only now as they should.

I was gripped with excitement at knowing that if I slowly, continuously, circled and examined the tree, much more would be revealed.