Rating: 5/5

Just did a REread of these two wonderful books under the 
Title "The Days Were Too Short" which captures
 the Nostalgia of their subject without any mawkish sentimentality
...and therein lies their strength, 
while retaining charm and humour and sorrow.
A brilliant recounting of Provencal Lives and a Childhood.

THERE ARE NO SPOILERS IN THIS RAVE !!!!
 
I read these two books under the One Title of
"The Days Were Too Short" in the early 1960's.
Marcel Pagnol wrote and had them published in 1957 when he was 62 years old.
He died in 1975 having written two more books about his Provencal Childhood.
I was surprised to discover recently that the books were originally written for children 
and were quite brief...having read the first 20 pages I have my doubts about this!!!
The English Title really picks up on the heavy Nostalgic Feel that these books convey,
very probably not to children who are too young to be 'nostalgic',
but with adults this aspect of a Lost Past has absolutely WOWED them.
AND me !!! And Unashamedly so.
One has only to read the reviews here and Everyone is totally besotted
even though Most of Us never had a Provencal Childhood;
but we all had....a Childhood !!...and somehow they were all touched by a Magic of some kind.
Innocence, first experiences, gullibility, naivety, first happinesses and first griefs...
all are Common yet Unique - the environments, the families, the times, the child etc.
A Lost World...and Life will never have that magic again.
I haven't read them since the 60's, but I have NEVER forgotten them.
Mine were condensed by Reader's Digest...as if they weren't short enough !!!
BUT I have NEVER let that book go. It was something very precious to me and still is.
It has followed me around and always found its niche on my Bookshelves.
The memory of it is painful as well as delightful...that is because of the 'nostalgia' of course.
I could feel it in the reviews...and I read ALL of them.
Two films, named for the first two books - My Father's Glory" and "My Mother's Castle"-
were released around 1990 accompanied by very evocative music.
Of course I saw them, as I'm sure any Fan of the books would have as soon as they became aware of them...you see, we were actually ADDICTED....and still are I bet!! Happily addicted, which is what addicton is all about surely.
In a way I dread having to read them again...will I survive another exposure ??

WATCH THIS SPACE then !!!!