Rating: 5/5

UPDATE: $2.99 Kindle US today 9/21/21

Listened to the audio this time and it was awesome The narrator is Steven Weber and he did a great job! 

Hello, welcome to Derry.. I'm Pennywise the Clown and at some point, especially if your a kid, I will eat your face off! Have a nice day!

The first time I read this book was in the 6th grade and I had forgotten how good it was! I loved the movie as well, but the book is so much better! 

I love how Mr. King goes back and forth from when the friends were kids and to them as adults and what they do in life now, while they are on their way back to Derry. See, when they were young and all became friends, they made a pact that if "IT" ever came back so would they. 

IT showed itself to them in many different creeptastic ways but "IT" showed itself more as Pennywise the Clown! 

Bill's little brother Georgie was the first one to be.. um.. eaten... by Pennywise. I'm sorry, I don't care how old I am, if I saw a creepy clown down in a drain-gutter thingy (leave me alone, I forgot the name!) I would have ran until I fell over! I mean..no..no...no.. and NO! 

Bill, Eddie, Ben, Richie, Stan, Beverly, and Mike are all friends. I love each of their separate stories and I love their friendship together. They are all picked on by the town bully/jerk named Henry Bowers, but when they are together Henry can just go on down the road when the little group gets their courage and attacks Henry and his gang. 

I love the camaraderie between the friends and how they believe each others stories of meeting Pennywise, even when he wasn't in clown form. They didn't ridicule each other, they watched out for each other the best they could. 

At one point they think they kill ole Pennywise, but after many years and the killing of kids starts happening again, Mike, who stayed in Derry at the library, calls everyone home. It's weird how they all forget anything that ever happened to them until they get that phone call. It's like they were made to forget. 

And there is sweet Pennywise to welcome them back! Uggggg, clowns!!!!!!!!

I know there are some people out there that hasn't read the book so I won't give out any spoilers for them, but one of the group commits suicide before anything even gets started and another of the group gets killed before they kill Pennywise for good.. or is IT really dead? I think Mr. King should bring him back with a whole new set of peeps that have to take him out :) Yes, I'm not quite right in the head! 

This is a very long book to read, but you know good books like this one really doesn't matter the length, when they are written very well, it just doesn't seem like a tome. Well, with the exception of holding the book up if you have joint issues, just let it rest quietly on your lap tray while you read :) 

I didn't get bored not one time in this book, I did, however want to shoot a few people and of course Pennywise... but I digress. 

At the end Mr. King wrote:

This book was begun in Bangor, Maine, on September 9th, 1981, and completed in Bangor, Maine, on December 28th, 1985.

That's a good amount of time and would explain how freaking good the book was in all of the detail. The detail was just awesome! 

I'm going to leave you with one last thing........

THEY ALL FLOAT DOWN HERE.....

MY BLOG: Melissa Martin's Reading List