Rating: 5/5

“People have a great opinion of the advantages of experience. But in that connection experience always means something disagreeable as opposed to the charm and innocence of illusions.”

Originally, what was to be published in early 1916 under the title The Shadow-Line. A Confession was at first intended by Conrad to become a mainly autobiographical tale of The First Command ever held by a young and inexperienced captain. Conrad, in his long seaman’s career, only had one single command himself, on the iron barque “Otago”, and the story he was about to write was to be based mainly on his own experiences during this short period of time, which was beset by similar difficulties to those described in this piece of fiction. As the First World War proceeded, however, Conrad thought it more and more egotistical to centre on his own individual reminiscences when many young men, his own son Borys amongst them, risked their lives on the battlefields of Europe, and so his work soon slackened, before the story turned into allegory in Conrad’s hands. This is why he decided to discard the title The First Command in favour of the more mysterious The Shadow-Line, which, in a rather abstract introduction, he defined as the border between the innocence of childhood and the more or less playful challenges of youth on the one hand and the more serious claims that adult life makes on the resilience, resourcefulness, responsibilities and moral strength of men. On the outside, The Shadow-Line looks like a story of initiation, of coming-of-age when the unnamed first-person narrator tells us how he quit a perfect job on the ship he has been serving on, for no real reason but that he feels he must have a change and with no set purpose whatsoever. His good reputation as a sailor, however, precedes him, and he is offered a command on board a sailing ship, whose previous captain died. He gladly accepts this opportunity but as ill-luck will have it, the ship not only goes into a lull of more than two weeks but the hands are also plagued by malaria, and he soon has to find out that there is hardly any quinine on board the ship. The first mate, Mr. Burns, riddled with fever, is convinced that it is the ghost of the late captain, whom he considers to be the epitome of wickedness, who has cast a curse on the ship and its men, and the only man, apart from the narrator himself, whose mental and physical powers are not impaired by malaria, is Mr. Ransome, the ship’s cook, a former sailor who suffers from a heart condition. In other words, things don’t bode well for our protagonist, and he has to keep his wits together – despite a raving first mate and a languishing crew – in order to get his men out of danger.

”There was nothing original, nothing new, startling, informing to expect from the world: no opportunities to find out something about oneself, no wisdom to acquire, no fun to enjoy. Everything was stupid and overrated, even as Captain Giles was. So be it.”

Like most young men, our narrator is rather convinced of his own wisdom and his manifold qualities at the onset of the story, and we get to know him as a rather irascible, cocksure individual, who looks down on the old captain Giles, whose acquaintance he makes at the sailors’ home where he resides after quitting his good berth. He often mocks the captain’s tendency to indulge in what he considers the pointless, trite ramblings and the staple-sententiousness of an aging man, and yet it is the captain’s ability to read the signs of the world around him that enables our narrator to get the command in the first place, and thereby to start his journey into adulthood. The rather short novel abounds in other father figures – the officious and awe-inspiring Deputy-Neptune Captain Ellis, who presides over the Harbour Office, the gentle Captain Kent, his former master whose praise of him makes him eligible as a candidate for the command in the first place, an unnamed elderly doctor, who fails to notice that the former captain has replaced the valuable quinine with some worthless powder in order to make a quick profit, and Mr. Ransome, whose mere presence seems to reassure the protagonist and keep him from joining in Mr. Burns’s delusions.

My sensations could not be like those of any other man on board. In that community I stood, like a king in his country, in a class all by myself. […] I was brought there to rule by an agency as remote from the people and as inscrutable almost to them as the Grace of God.”

Despite the support he gets from Ransome – and he got from those other father figures, most of whom he cannot help despising – the protagonist’s mind is initially set entirely upon himself. Elated by his new dignity as the commander of a ship, he sees himself as one member of a long chain of nautical potentates, as part of”a sort of composite soul, the soul of command”, set aside from the hands on board and ordained to find his own way through the challenges and difficulties heaped upon himself, his men and his ship, and to take his own decisions in order to do this. ”I was oppressed by my lonely responsibilities” is the sentiment he voices in retrospect. In the course of events, however, he realizes the braveness, the duteousness and the reliability of his crew, who are undaunted by the discovery that there is no more quinine – a fact that the captain egotistically blames himself for – and who, with what little life they have in themselves, help him steer his ship through its final confrontation with the merciless elements.”Worthy of my undying regard” are the words that go with the title of the story, and this inscription clearly refers to the men, who never for a moment thought of shirking their duties and giving in to fatalism. We may say that here again, in choosing this inscription, Conrad was influenced by the sense of duty he discovered in the war effort. 

”’Yes, that’s what it amounts to […] Precious little rest in life for anybody. […]’”

This spirit of heroism becomes all the more remarkable, Conrad seems to say, when we consider that in his heart of hearts, every single individual has the fear, the concern for their own dear life. When, after the crisis, Ransome asks the captain to give him his leave, the captain is dismayed and does not want to part with the cook, and on saying this he sees ”a look of almost savage determination” pass over Ransome’s face and then he realizes ”the humble reality of things”: Through all his acts of bravery and self-denial, Ransome has been afraid for himself, for his own individual life. The idea of mere heroism, of braving it out for the sake of glory and the fun of it, was alien to even so remarkable a man as Ransome, and thus the belief in picture-book heroism is maybe the last youthful illusion our narrator has to leave behind in crossing the ultimate shadow-line towards real manhood. Life is suffering, is toiling, is sacrificing, but it would be empty if we had nothing to suffer, toil and sacrifice for – and herein lies the true spirit of responsibility, as opposed to foolhardiness or fanaticism.