Rating: 2/5

This was one of the first Saddle Club books I read, back in the early 1990s. I wasn't too impressed with it, and gave my copy away. I remembered it being mostly about people, than horses, but there is more horse action in it than I remembered. 

Samson gets halter training lessons (or lack thereof) from the Saddle Club. Max owns the foal. Why isn't he doing it? And why did he wait so long to put a halter on Samson? Kids' book series logic -- where we mortals are not meant to understand.

The story is mostly told from Lisa's point of view. Somehow, this 13 year old gets a column with the local newspaper. That would never happen today, and I really doubt it would've happened in 1990, when this book was first published. The moral of this book was that gossip is not news ... well, actually ... it is. It's currently a $3 BILLION (US) annual industry. My own crippled mother is addicted to this stuff, and has been for decades. She quit cigarettes cold turkey, but ain't quitting this.

Arguably, what Lisa wrote was not gossip. Speculation, failed attempts at humor, but not actually gossip. People told her their stuff was missing -- and the stuff was. That's not really gossip, since the stuff did actually go missing. Gossip would be "A source at Pine Hollow said that Veronica was a kleptomaniac." See the difference?

There are continuity problems in this book, such as Samson being only two months old, and Stevie being mentioned as a 12 year old, when she turned 13 in book 6. Lisa also notes that her mother did NOT want her to be a straight-A student. Since when? The slightly dumbed-down writing style started in the last book continues here, making me wonder if Bonnie Bryant actually wrote this ... or if she just started to not care anymore.

Another reviewer commented on the cover of the original edition that the artist did Lisa dirty -- and that reviewer was absolutely right. Although the cover was done in 1989 or 1990, I lived during those years, and I can tell you that hair style was not popular. The story is quite dated, with clothing and hair styles from the 1980s described. 

There is a pet store in this book that sells puppies, and the girls go and cuddle puppies. I wanted to vomit. Pet store puppies were always from puppy mills, and those puppies most likely would soon be dead from parvo or another disease, since they often didn't get vaccinated. If they survived to adulthood, they often died young due to inbreeding.