Rating: 4/5

Reread Early March 2023. Prior read July 2006

In the Skin of a Lion is a lyrical historical-fiction novel writen by Michael Ondaatje. It’s set in the 1920’s and 30’s in Canada. I found beauty often in the way he writes and the rhythms of his dialogues and sentences. And all the little details that gave life and depth to the story. 

The ways our main character Patrick Lewis learns how to be in the world and develops his craft is by watching his father. There is beauty in their working together. His father teachers not in words but by offering his son experiences. They work in the quiet of the world; In touch with it. 

In the beginning of the book Michael Ondaatje creates a stunning sense of place in the once wildness of Canada. Patrick’s first thing each winter morning was to
go to the kitchen window to watch a group of men dressed in the same dark clothes, with axes and lunches attached to their belts go off to work. He wonders each day where they are from and what work they do. This is the start of of documenting the growing immigrant community in Canada and Toronto. He brought alive cultures, different voices and singing and joy together at gatherings.

In the 1920 and 30’s Toronto is building a bridge under and over the lake and when that’s done a waterworks is started. Cheap labor is needed. Immigrants want to work to feed themselves and their families. They are exploited. There are no labor unions yet. Many people die from the work. Haves and have nots. And many of their names unknown. Long days in wretched weather at times. And some getting wet and cold having to entertain the water or work in mud. Patrick Lewis is a dynamite pro he gets paid a dollar a day. Extra sometimes for more set ups. He gets paid more then most people because of his craft. He cares about these people -

One day building the bridge a nun is on it. And she is blown away. It’s a wonderfully written scene. Most of the workers and those who heard the storybdon’t know if she lived or died.
There are other unusual characters in the book. He writes them all differently. The management of the projects do not see the workers or know their names. Michael Ondaaje in small little ways give them a sense of place and life. 

Patrick Lewis is rather quiet working. He has 2 love relationships at different times.. Both women were best friends. And very different. His latter love was the mom of a young girl named Hannah. She is a terrific kid. Her mom is an artist - 
an actor and dancer. When the book closes Hannah is 16. You might remember her if you read or saw The English Patient movie. She was the nurse who said: “Why is it that everyone I love dies.” We learn a little more about her life and why she said that. Patrick is terrific with her and she him. They are family. He came alive in their company. Giggles and laughter and love. 
 
We have one other character you might remember too. And that is the Caravaggio - the Thief in the English Patient who lost his thumbs. He and Patrick meet in prison. 

I am so glad I read this again. I really enjoyed it. I admire Michael Ondaatje story telling and use of language. That was really rich in this his second novel. I have to confess I listened to it on audible. The reader was excellent - he added a lot to the book. It was a very smooth read. However it seemed to be abridged. I didn’t check which I usually do. It seemed different then when I read it the first time in June 2006. Smoother.