Rating: 3/5

PS: In anticipation of Kenneth Branagh's 9/15/23 film adaptation, A Haunting in Venice, the trailer for which makes it look better than I recall this book read.

“I hate water”—Ariadne Oliver, once rescued at sea by a friend.

“I hate apples. I never want to see another apple again”—Ariadne Oliver

Hallowe’en Party, Hercule Poirot #36, the second to last Poirot novel, published in 1969, and the second to last written, since Curtain was written in the forties, ready to publish when the end would finally come about (which didn’t happen for more than a quarter of a century later!). To say this is better than you’d expect is no compliment, of course, but it ust is. I had little expectations except to be happily surprised at the cleverness of some aspects of the ending, as I always am, and in that respect was not disappointed.

Hostile 13-year-old Joyce, known to be a compulsive liar, tells everyone at a Halloween Party for “Plus Elevens” that she once saw a murder; when no one believes, she leaves in a huff and is promptly drowned in the tub for bobbing apples. This is the second of the Poirot books, both of them written when Christie was a grandmother, where children die, and others almost die. An expression of grandparently worry? 

Aside from the lively opening, in the spirit of P.G. Wodehouse, to whom the book is dedicated, the book descends for more than a 100 pages into a dull and somewhat needless side story about a forged codicil to a will. This is a Halloween story, can it not be a little scary? Can it not connect to Halloween more than just the opening?! We do have a woman, Mrs. Goodbody who plays a witch at the party, who also seems to have some actual (though underutilized) psychic capacity, and who presciently tells Poirot:

“Ding dong dell, A pussy in the well”— quoting a nursery rhyme [and can a reference to pussies in the pussy hat Women’s March generation ever again be only a reference to cats? It IS here! And in my house with three actual cats!]

But Christie is (largely) consistent; if you think a murder has to do with madness or magic, you are wrong. Sprites or drooling crazies are not generally killers in Christie. It is usually greed, at the base of things, in some way or the other. You need a reason to kill.

The killer in this tale kills for greed, but it is money s/he requires to create Beauty, to make Art. So s/he kills, in the manner of Agamemnon, who sacrificed his daughter Iphegenia so that he could get a wind to take him to Troy.

“There is always a brave world, but only, you know, for very special people. The lively ones. The ones who carry the making of that world within themselves”—Poirot

This novel, set in 1969, includes several references to young men with raucous rock n roll voices and “piles of unruly hair.” Dame Christie and the sixties were not a match, let’s just say. There are water and apple references throughout this tale—one house that figures in is even called Apple Trees--and as Poirot points out, 

“One always comes back to apples”—Poirot

It is "scatty” detective writer Ariadne Oliver that invites Poirot to help solve the murder(s), which do pile up near the end. She's a lively character, the best thing that came to the imagination of the later Christie.

Hallowe’en Party is quite good in places, it really is, overall, but it is uneven, including long passages of near irrelevance and boredom after a promising energetic and amusing opening, though it has, I’ll admit, a pretty satisfying conclusion. She didn't get to be the world's bestselling author because she is clue-less. It's not scary, not really at all, but it is for Halloween.