Rating: 5/5

”If you tell us who sent you here, and where he is now, you will go free. If you don’t tell us quickly, I will pour gasoline all over you and set you on fire.” This, of course, was not a physical threat, but only an idiomatic expression that shouldn’t be taken literally. “Who sent you here?”

Mr. Rahman remained silent. 

I rephrased my question in the form of a suggestion to Mr. Rahman and said, “I think you should tell me who sent you, and where he is.” I should mention that I had my glock out now and, for some reason, Mr. Rahman had put the muzzle in his mouth.

Mr. Rahman was properly terrified. 

This book had a high page count, but large font and a brisk pace. I could not put it down for the last week. It doesn’t let up.

John Corey. Here’s a guy whose methods aren’t exactly “by the book”, but he sure gets shit done.
I really wasn’t expecting to rate this one so highly, but I have to. It is that good. This is only my third Nelson DeMille book, and frankly it caught me off guard how well this book was crafted and written-but I’ll come back to that in a bit. This is John Corey’s second outing, and like in the first book, he’s rude, crude, completely non-PC and is filled with god-tier dad jokes. If that is going to be an issue for you, then go no further. This time around, the stakes are far higher as we see the wounded but recovered Corey working for the ATTF-a fictional agency (based on the Joint Terrorist Task Force) that works in busting and short-circuiting international Terrorism. The book starts ominously-a plane stops responding to the ground and lands, and it quickly becomes apparent that things are not well on this flight. We are then introduced to a separate third person narrative following our villain, Asad Khalil, a truly evil and terrifying bad guy with a score to settle with the US. This begins a countrywide chase, and the heat is on to catch Khalil before he leaves too many corpses in his wake.

DeMille’s writing is straightforward, as usual, but his storytelling chops here are on full display, and he is absolutely on fire. In the previous 2 DeMille books I have read, Plum Island and Up Country, DeMille sticks to a strict first person narrative. It works well, and those books were solid reads, but what he does in this book showed me that I had underestimated his writing abilities. Here we have the usual first person, as well as multiple third person narratives, the main one following our villain, and it works spectacularly. We even get one flashback section. This book spends a very large amount of time with Khalil, and DeMille does not hold back. It is dark, and violent. He’s an ice cold villain who’s motives are understandable, yet he is a ruthless psychopath.

This novel is pre 9/11 in the US, and it’s pretty obvious from the attitudes taken towards terrorism. I believe this novel came out in 2000, and had DeMille written this book a year or two later, it would’ve been a much different story-however, despite being somewhat dated for that reason, it’s still very readable.

This is a twisted revenge story mixed with a procedural, and it works so well. Being along for the ride with Khalil makes joining back up with John Corey even more thrilling and even saddening, as he desperately follows every lead-racking his brain and bending the rules to find this lunatic. I have gained a lot more respect for DeMille and his writing after reading this book. His writing style is simple, but thoroughly competent. He also has a dry sense of humor that will either make you roll your eyes or laugh out loud. He’s one of those guys that makes it look easy—effortless storytelling with direct and easy to understand language. I assure you, it’s not as easy as he makes it look. 

Now I’m a tad bummed there are two books in the series before The Lion, but I’m sure those will be good reads. Wild Fire looks especially interesting-but nonetheless I’ve more or less resigned myself to the fact that I now hope to read all of DeMille’s novels over the next couple years. The guy’s got a big catalogue and he’s certainly got me hooked. I think my plan is to stick with the John Corey books for now before moving on to things like The Gold Coast and The Charm School. The JC books are incredibly entertaining. Anywho, now I’m just babbling.

4.5/5 rounded up. This was a hell of a book, and contains scenes that will be sticking with me for a long time to come.