Rating: 3/5

I kept thinking that surely this couldn’t really have been true. How could a wealthy English woman, born in the 19th century and used to a life of relative ease, travel alone through the Rocky Mountains in the fall of 1873? But she was no fictional character and this series of letters written to her sister back home in England is no hoax. She was one gutsy Victorian lady and apparently quite used to roughing it on her own, because no sooner had she finished a trip to the Sandwich Islands then she set off again for San Francisco to travel by train through the Sierra Nevadas and on to Cheyenne, Wyoming and from there to Fort Collins, Colorado to begin her journey on horseback into the Rocky Mountains. Her goal was Estes Park, and her letters are an amazing account of her adventures.

She often relied on word of mouth to point out which trail to follow and had no qualms about wandering alone into remote areas where she described even the roughest “mountain men” as perfect gentlemen when in the presence of a lady. She traveled either by foot or “rent-a-horse” (which apparently was pretty easy to do back in the days when there was no other method of getting from place to place.) In an era that pre-dated motel chains and tourist resorts, there was an informal network of shacks and cabins inhabited by settlers who were ready to offer a bed for the night to strangers who needed a place to stay before setting off again to wherever they were headed. 

Despite freezing temperatures, winter storms, rattlesnakes, wild animals and treacherous mountain paths, Isabella always managed to find her way to where she wanted to be, hiring local people when necessary to serve as guides. She loved the mountain scenery and rhapsodized at length about sunsets, sunrises, snow on the mountain peaks and the lush vistas that stretched out all around her as she traveled into Estes Park where she managed to make it to the top of Long’s Peak after a truly horrifying climb, dressed in her “Hawaiian riding costume” (whatever on earth that was!) Through it all, she managed to write faithfully to her sister back home in England, filling her letters with detailed accounts of all her adventures and somehow making it sound like it was nothing more strenuous than a stroll across the English moors.