Rating: 5/5

This is a really interesting book… it took me a lot longer than I expected, and that is a good thing.

First, this book is from 1978, which gave a nice window into the past. Some thinkers (like Hegel, Marx) are less popular now, but that doesn’t diminish the value of the discussion. Lamenting about people lost in “modern times” and turning away from God seem, on the other, to be from all times.

I especially liked the really thorough discussion and approach on engaging with philosophy. About 2/3 of the book is a deep dive from Descartes to modern thoughts about God from Einstein. It is a really deep approach, engaging fully with the arguments. This part could even be considered an introduction into philosophy of religion. There is no upfront agenda when treating these thinkers, including ardent atheists. Arguments are followed through, criticisms and even countercriticisms are formulated.
A minus however is that atheists are considered to have become atheists because of “something” in their personal history. That may be true, but then the same argument should then be investigated for religious persons, too, just to be honest.

Then there is an important step into the proving of the existence of God, by argument a fundamental trust (Grundvertrauen) in the “I”, “the world” (science) and “ethics”. It is a well thought argument, and I would be inclined to follow it. However, and that is a bit of a strawman and false dichotomy, it is positioned against nihilism. That seems a bit too fast, as other approaches to reality and the self and ethical behavior like humanism could also profit from this fundamental trust, without going further into the existence of God.
I do however like the argumentation that to have human worth (and therefore a just society), one needs to engage in trust in the self and world. This is a critical argument against relativism, even though current science has brought additional input on conscience and passage of time.

The final part, to be expected, is the proving of God’s existence. Kuhn’s approach is very honest NOMA (no overlapping magisterial), meaning that there is no rational-only proof of God, but also, and very interestingly, there is no “just believe it” without rational input and engaging with the philosophical arguments as outlined. Even though the domains of ratio and belief are separate, both are equal and need to be respected.
In the end, Kuhn even indicates the valid belief in the Christian God, engaging also in arguments about the Trinity and with respect of (then current) knowledge within exegesis of the Bible. The result, to me, is a bit of a wishy-washy God, which certainly is more interesting than a fundamentalist or literalist belief, but insufficiently indicates why this is different from other religions or humanism (even though Kuhn engages this topic too). Maybe, in another time, this would have fully convinced me, but now it left me hanging a bit. Especially given his criticisms of the Church (nothing new there) and in light of his interdiction to teach that came hardly a year later.

In any case, this book, because of the sheer breadth of the argumentation and honest intellectual discussion, is worth the read. Even if you disagree with the conclusion, you come away with a lot of interesting and engaging arguments. I recommend this book.