Rating: 5/5

One never knows when one will bump into a sociopathic, narcissistic, obsessive bastard.

Well in this story, poor old, wealthy businessman, Mr Greenleaf, just happens to be that unlucky guy. His son, Richard (Dickie) Greenleaf has been living the life (all funded by daddy) in Italy and doesn’t seem to want to come home. Now, Daddy wants Dickie back home so he can teach him the ropes of his successful family business.

Daddy engages Tom Ripley, a decent enough guy, respectable, tidy, seems bright. He offers Ripley a fully funded trip to Italy to talk Dickie into coming home. You know, I think I’d take Mr Greenleaf up on that offer. Sounds like a blast right?

Tom Ripley arrives in the beautiful wee country town of Mongibello to find the languid Dickie living a wonderfully relaxing life – sitting on the beach with his friend Marge (oh my, this relationship is interesting). Ripley took on this job on the pretence that he and Dickie were mates. Well, they’re not – Dickie has no idea who he is. He doesn’t recognise Ripley when he sees him on the beach for the first time.

Marge, Dickie and Tom Ripley.........friends for life

Now starts a train of events only Patty Highsmith could conjure up. Murder, deception, suspicion – it’s brilliant. She had me in the palm of her hand for the entire time. I slept with Tom Ripley every night for a few days, he tricked me, played with me, shocked me but do you know what ? In the morning, he still respected me. Because after all, he’s a decent man. A man can't ask for no more than that. Call me old-fashioned if you like.

Check out Mongibello, beautiful right?

This smouldering classic, delivers. But what really makes it work for me is the way Patty makes us root for Tom Ripley, yes, the bloody villain!!!!

You’ll also get a beautiful sense of Italy in this story, as we visit places like Mongibello, Rome, Naples and San Remo. This is the first Highsmith book I have read (and I’ve read her a few times) where the sense of place is important. She paints Italy in such vivid colours. 

5 Blistering Stars….Highly recommended, I wouldn’t deceive you now would I ? 😉