Rating: 2/5

I'm sorry, I was a huge fan and had a lot of hope when I red the first book, it had a compelling story, good structure, good character development, focus, build up, it was really the perfect novel. I had a lot of hope when I got the second book it would be more of the same, but it isn't. I'm halfway thru, don't think I'll finish it. More in detail:

The topic of the first book was struggle, growth and salvation of a little girl.

The topic of the second book is....depression, and not just every single character, but you the reader also. It's like reading Blood Meridian but in prehistoric Alaska. Violence galore, abuse, rape, torture, kidnapping, mass deaths, gore (SEVERE GORE, like bone crushing gore), and unlike the first novel this one just goes on and on page after page without a break. It's exhausting to read, depressing, kind of revolting. But that's only what made me stop reading it halfway thru and not what I believe the actual demise of this novel is - having more characters, plot lines, points of view crammed in a single chapter than a reader can read thru with complete focus in his life time. Every character has a point of view part crammed in the middle of a chapter, every single one, and there's maybe 20 of them, some of them die halfway, some stop appearing as point of views halfway thru the book for no reason. The plot lines don't connect, everyone has their own ambition that doesn't revolve around the story, at some point you realize you're reading 10 different books at the same time. What is the main plot? No idea. Who is the main character? Not a clue. See those things were all clear in the first book and that's what made it one of my all time top 10's. Not this one. This book has the setting of the first book, but not its atmosphere, the characters without the plot, the action without a story and for some reason everyone you read about has turned evil. Even Chagak has her moments in the first few chapters. There is not a single good character in this book you can sympathize with and understand their struggle. They are all selfish, arrogant and overemotional. 

I would've given the first book a 6 star rating if I could, not this one. It's readable, I love Sue's amazing fluid prose, but prose isn't enough to save it I'm afraid, only one star extra for that. I might return to finish it for completions sake, but I'm hugely disappointed and hope the third isn't such a series killer.