Rating: 5/5

Garcia Marquez has the uncanny ability to make me fall in love with his characters. No, really, head over the heels in love, crushing hard, stomach churning, heart contracting. It happened the first time many moons ago when I read Nobody Writes to the Colonel, an aching story of loneliness and abandonment that brought me to my knees. This time I fell in love with Simón Bolívar. I can pinpoint the exact moment it happened, too:

Through his father and his mother he [José Laurencio Silva] was a dark-skinned member of the lower class of pardo half-breeds, but the General had married him to Felicia, another of his nieces. During his career he had risen from a sixteen-year old volunteer in the liberating army to a field general at the age of fifty-eight, and he had suffered more than fifteen serious wounds and numerous minor ones, inflicted by a variety of weapons, in fifty-two battles in almost all the campaigns for independence. The only difficulty he encountered as a pardo was his rejection by a lady of the local aristocracy during a gala ball. The General then requested they repeat the waltz, and he danced it with Silva himself.
	
The image of these two friends dancing together after one of them was snubbed by racists was so vivid and clear in my mind, the beautiful resolution of an ugly moment. I know little about the historical Bolívar; Garcia Marquez paints him as a man steeped in contradictions, trying to adapt to adverse circumstances, aiming for the best, but resigned to the worse. There is one consistent idea he never abdicates: that of the unification of South America. This was the dream of a Gran Colombia whose dissolution, he fears, would plunge into chaos a territory which extended from Panama to the Amazon river. 

Bolívar knows this land like the lines of his hand. Ever since he left his home town of Caracas to go to Europe as a teenager, he never stopped wandering. Upon his return to South America, he conspired, fought and liberated all these countries by marching incessantly from battlefield to battlefield, over mountains, down rivers, and into cities, in a mockery of today’s national borders. Homeless and uprooted, unable to return to his country and unwilling to compromise, his home became the Continent, or rather, this dream of a unified South America. If Gran Colombia persisted, then he’d be justified in his unending travels. He would finally arrive at something. 

Marquez documents his last journey down and along the Magdalena river. Bolívar tells everyone he’s going to a European exile, but no one believes him, least of all himself. He can’t tear himself off his dream, the land he gave his life to, and so he continues to wander aimlessly, hoping to become relevant again but knowing he won’t, waiting for letters that won’t arrive, hiding his disease and denying his impending death. 

Pursued by ghosts who died, betrayed him or simply stayed behind, the final 20 pages gift us a man at his most genuine: alone, aware that he’s dying, the fight slowly draining from him. Only then, perhaps, did he become truly great. Or truly human. What is the difference, after all?