Rating: 4/5

Undoubtedly, Asimov's Robot stories set the standard for science fiction short stories around the literary world. His Three laws of Robotics are celebrated and debated even decades after its inception and his Robot stories are still described as visionary. This anthology collects almost every Robot short stories written by Asimov in his lifetime. Only six Robot short stories are left out, and 31 of his coolest and sharpest stories can be found in this collection, organized by Asimov himself to give the best flow possible.

The beauty of Asimov's tales is the verity of themes and unique problems he incorporated in his stories. His Robot stories are not mere tidbits, but it's a warning for humanity to be careful with its invention, yet reminding us that the answers can only be found with the help of science. These stories play with our logic, questions morality, and showcases the unpredictable nature of the undefined.

It's tough to pick favorites when it comes to these stories. After much deliberation, these are my top five.

  Runaround (1941–42):
 Runaround is the spectacular story which explicitly introduced the three laws of Robotics, the recurring element which became the cornerstone of Robot stories. The story features Asimov's recurring characters, Powell and Donovon who are working on Planet Mercury when a Robot starts acting weird. The smartness of this problem presented by Asimov in the tale and the final solution is why I love this story.

  Reason (1941):
 Another Powell and Donovon story, set on a space station. This story follows a Robot who does not believe he was created by humans because the Robots are much superior to its creator. This spectacular premise and excellent execution make it one helluva story.

  Galley Slave (1957):
 I love courtroom dramas! This one features a case where a human accuses Robot of wrongdoing. Also features brilliant Susan Calvin, another Asimov's recurring character.

  Mirror Image (1972):
 This story reunites the reader with Daniel R and officer Elijah Baley from Robot novels. It tells the tale of a fascinating crime involving plagiarism, reputation, robots, and the three damned laws of robotics. Get ready to brainstorm! 

  The Bicentennial Man (1976):
 Asimov calls The Bicentennial Man as his best Robot story, and he is not wrong on that matter. The scope and the themes featured in this story is vast and fascinating. The beauty of the story is its beating heart and the emotions it carries. The story tells the story of Andrew, a unique robot, and his life through generations.

My selections here are entirely subjective, as my love for pure logic precedes emotional and pulpy robot stories. A must-read collection if you are a Sci-Fi fan!