Rating: 3/5

The first book I read from Camerounese author Mongo Betti was titled "France against Africa", an excellent non-fiction book. This book is a fiction story detailing realistically all aspects of dramatic life in Caemroun under the despotism of the Biya regime. The story is about a reporter who suffers from several events in a one year period from finding a corpse in his appartment, the explosion of a building, an arrest and the disappearance of his girlfriend. Unlike the stereoptypical investigative reporter we read in books or watch in hollywood movies, this Camerounese reporter, nicknamed ZAM, is an alcoholic, language abusive against his girlfrien, a coward and a passive character not conducting any investigation nor writing reporters, but he's labeled an intellectual. Unfortunately, the author didn't develop this central character enough as if he had not past whatsoever and stays unchanged throughout the story. The author didn't develop any of the other characters such as Eddie the reporter's friend, the reporter's boss, the Detective Norbert, the Fernch Georges, and/or the girlfriend nicknamed Bebette, besides writing a few descriptions. 

The author wrote so much about the situation in Cameroon under Biya regime from various apects of life, but the characters needed more depth. The central character was passive, but his friend Eddie was active in trying to find out what's going on. The various events suffered by the reporter seems to be unrelated with no begining nor end to it. No reader can guess what the full story is about as the author disperse the clues in different directions through various characters. Like in the book says, it is forbidden for the police to investigate because it could lead to a high profile personality. Therefore, the readers shouldn't expect a fiction story based on police/journalistic investigation as read in numerous books written by Western authors. 

This book is very good in giving a realistic and dramatic picture of Cameroun in the 1990's, but it lacks the literature aspect of a story such as characters development and closure to numerous stories hapening throughout the book.