For a long time, this feels like a romance novel: swooning and fawning women, silent and hunky men. Vomit, vomit, vomit. And then, just when the novel is about to end and you're so fed up with the number of times Ann Grant says that Harris Arden "affected her curiously", then, all of a sudden, right near the end, in the face of an awful tragedy, the characters become real, and then you wonder if it was worth suffering through everything else to see a tiny glimpse of the human condition.

The central story of Evening is that of a dying woman rediscovering her own life through memories that flood back to her on her deathbed. At her death, Ann Lord--nee Grant, then Katz, then Stackpole, then Lord, finally--realizes that nothing really meant anything but the "true love" she discovered during a two-day affair with an engaged man that she met at a friend's wedding. 

The central conceit of Evening is that this true love is anything deeper than the adolescent impulses of one Romeo and one Juliet, two teenagers with oversized crushes. 

Ok, let's pause for a moment. I'm a romantic. I love serendipity and sensuality. But life--and love, too--are larger than single encounters. Romantic and ecstatic moments are romantic and ecstatic, but they are only a part of what makes our lives rich.

In Evening, if the next forty years of Ann Lord's life pale next to one night of groping and one night of steamy sex in the forest with her burning love doctor, then the novel reveals either Ann Lord's limits, or it suggests a narrow range of earthly purpose. Yes, we are sexual beings, but let's acknowledge that meaning can come in many forms.

Let's pause again. I'm an idea guy--it's what being a romantic means. Ideas are ways of seeing things; they are fresh perspectives and thoughts. But, while I engage and pursue ideas, I do my damnedest to temper them with doses of real, hard worldliness. 

In Evening, we're beaten with an idea for over two hundred pages--an idea of romance, characters we're supposed to believe in: struggling but beautiful women, heroic but wounded men, clever and charming friends. And this main cast coexists with the lesser cast of the novel: depthless queens, consistent and dull semi-friends that adore but bore. 

But let's not call these people characters; they're caricatures. Their complexity is contrived, or nonexistent. They are ideas of people, and even if we believe in them, their belief in each other is even less substantial. Only in the end does anything real happen that snaps everyone out of their fancy and into a complexity that we, the readers, can finally believe. A complexity something like our own.

I wanted to enjoy this book, but I didn't. I met Susan Minot briefly once, and she impressed me. Alas.

This is not to say, however, that this book does not have value. It is well written--like a symphony assembled by an expert composer, but based on a melodramatic melody. The craft of construction is there; it is varied and rich and laden with layers of meaning. Read the professional reviews to find out more about this. It withstands close scrutiny. It is full of stuff. 

But the story it tells is tedious and made of neon colors.

Do I recommend it? No. 
Would I teach it? No. It sustains close reading, but I just wouldn't enjoy it.
Lasting impression: It makes me wonder if there is a value to escapism. This is far, far better in its craft than supermarket fiction, but it reminds me of it nonetheless. The main character is caught up in herself, and we're meant to be caught up with her. If you are, then lucky you.