Rating: 4/5

This book had me all over the place.

But then again, it is a book written by James Patterson so I wasn't really shocked.

Roses are Red was good but I don't know if it was my favorite. I've read so many and while this book didn't disappoint me at all - it's just way to hard to pick a favorite book right now. I'm only on book 6 so I can't really be like "OMG THIS IS MY FAVORITE BOOK OUT OF THE WHOLE GOD DAMN SERIES" because there's a shit ton of books within this series. I want to read them all and then when I get to the last book I will somehow try to pick my favorite child.

Now back to this book and yes this review will have spoilers.

Roses are Red sort of gives you a murdering duo. However, you just know the person planning these murders out as The Mastermind. But is there really just one guy behind all of this? Who knows. 

Alex Cross is dealing with all of these robberies and murder scenes while also dealing with a crap ton of personal shit too. Christine is going through a post-traumatic stress situation with the whole kidnapping thing that happened a year ago. They, Alex and Christine, have had their baby in the last book (named Alex Junior) and he get's baptized in this one. However, the one thing I didn't see coming happened. Christine left. She fucking left Alex, the baby, the life, and moved to a different state. Now I didn't really like Christine in the beginning, then I foolishly started to like her in the last book, and now I hate her again. 

Then there's Alex and his kids and I don't want to spoil anything about them - I was just sad for like a chapter or two guys. Go read it. Cry with me. 

Other than that, there's the whole mastermind thing. It honestly confused me in some cases and I just wanted to figure out how everything was connected. And then the whole ending just blew my mind. I needed more. I hate cliffhangers. 

I'm so glad that I have a lot of these books either in my room or on my Kindle because I don't have to wait to read it. I'm going to dive right into the next book right now.