Rating: 5/5

I’ll forward this with, I don’t see very many people being able to casually read this book. This is a shame, because, with just a little bit of patience and an openness to a different style of storytelling, I think most people would agree that this book is badass. The problem is that it’s a story that’s either told by an unreliable narrator or a scatterbrained old woman who unabashedly keeps no truths secret or is making up new ones, it’s hard to say, either Jelinek is making us question the precedence of whether we should believe women or admit that they’re as equally full of shit as men. But I was just along for the ride because Jelinek is a wildcard when it comes to writing and I love all the freaky shit she writes about.

The book is told by way of a stream of consciousness like rambling, from a woman named Gerti, who is the mistress of Kurt Janisch, a country policeman. His appetite is all-consuming. That is, he is completely empty inside, which makes him a danger, because he longs to fill that void with consumption. Whether it be alcohol, women, wealth, or violence. His greed knows no limit. Women like Gerti know this, she sees the warning signs, but her human nature can’t resist that high-risk D. She ain’t even trying to fix him, just to keep him around. 

This book is part mystery because Kurt has another side chick named, Gabby. Who he may or may not have strangled to death during some lewd mouth exercises. But you don’t know what happened because the person telling you about it, Gerti, wasn’t there. She’ll tell you exactly what happened, but she doesn’t have a clue, however, you can’t help but believe her because she’s already told you so much about the country policeman, and that sort of behavior lines up with him, but that could all be something that made up too. See how confusing it gets. This is a book about the war of the bodies. There is an x rating for the sex acts and violence in this book. 

It’s a novel about so many things, as they are controlled by greed. The need for more property, wealth, sex, new sex, materialism, religion, social status, and the desire for death. It all adds up to a toxic relationship for those who suffer from it. Jelinek is all about the exploitive nature of the sexes and devouring one for the pleasure of the other, it’s all she’s ever written about. But this book also has a larger point, which is the need to understand the opposite sex, something men struggle with, but to try is a true act of love, one that would help a lot more than presupposing that the atmosphere of using one another like just another product is somehow natural. Because most products break after enough abuse.