Rating: 3/5

Being a fan of some of Susan Minot's other work, I was kind of disappointed in this book. It started off really slowly, and I almost gave up on it entirely. I just could not get into it, I found parts of it seemed poorly written. I am not a fan of the pages of run on, mixed up thoughts that went on too long. The story of what happened years ago in Ann's life, while attending the wedding of her friend, is the only thing that kept the book going. The rest of it seemed thrown in at weird times, and too scattered. I know that it was all relevant, but unfortunately it wasn't woven into the story very well.

The book only picked up and got interesting about a third of the way through, and I think a lot of people would not have even gotten that far. I only did because I wanted to like the book so much. I really enjoyed everything else I have read by Minot, and that coupled with the description on the back made me keep picking the book up hoping that it would redeem itself, even if I could only get through a few pages at a time until part way through. I am glad I didn't just toss it aside, and at least finished reading it, because the second half of the book was much more captivating, but it is still my least favourite of her work so far. 

I wouldn't recommend it for anyone who isn't already a fan Minot. If this had been the first of her work I had read, I would likely have never picked up anything else by her, which would be a shame. I would definitely recommend picking up Monkeys, Folly, or Lust &amp; Other Stories before reading this.

Interestingly enough, I noticed there was a movie made based on the book, and after watching the trailer, and I think I would actually find the movie more interesting. Fortunately, and unfortunately they drastically changed the story for the movie, which I have always found annoying when they base a movie on a book and then change the story so much that it hardly resembles the book at all, in this case I think they probably improved upon the story.