Rating: 4/5

This was the project Thomas Mann was working on at the time of his death. Intended as Part 1 (The Early Years), but subsequent volumes exist only in the Ether.

Mann does hint at further developments. Here he mentions the bullfighter Ribeiro, an "extremely handsome" slender youth who had already attracted the narrator's attention: Later, under another name, and as part of a double image, he was to reappear in my life. But of that in its proper place.

Double images are a recurring theme in this book; there are many examples, and the list may ultimately conclude with Thomas Mann himself and his fluidly adaptable creation Felix Krull. The character of Felix Krull, introduced to readers decades earlier in a short story of the same name, is revisited in this novel and his life expanded to incredible dimensions. A "confidence man" in modern parlance implies a sort of fraudster or grifter; but here the universally-attractive Felix Krull is not ripping people off—he is merely allowing their fantasies to project onto his youthful and appealing person. However there is a layer of deception, too, or misrepresentation, in that Krull is never who he appears to be. But whose fault is that? Just as clothes make the man, Felix tells us, sometimes the man makes the clothes. 

The reader of course will see Thomas Mann throughout the plot. A man dresses up and become respectable, accepted into society. Social mobility is a charade; so is respectability. The facade is crucial, but one must also absolutely believe in it: that is the true nature of confidence.

The text is reminiscent of Dostoevsky in places: verbose, tedious, profound, and overwhelming. The narrative lags towards the end, and was a challenge to complete. One has to wonder just where Mann intended to go next: what further adventures with this intriguing young attractive confidence man, armed with his letter of credit and borrowed title.

As a matter of form, it is astonishing to see the pages of the 1921 short story, almost word for word, incorporated into the start of this novel written some 30 years later. That itself is a feat of confidence.