Rating: 3/5

Written in that classic sci-fi style where characters are, at best, secondary to the idea.

The book is composed of two parts. The first part lays out the premise and I found it interesting. The second is a mystery, then a chase sequence, and a drag to get through.

The premise, though, is worth it: Humans are not native to Earth. Instead, humanity is descended from an alien species, the Pak, with a three-stage life cycle: Child, Breeder, Protector. A Pak is born a Child, not sentient. Then s/he matures into a Breeder (still not intelligent), which is able to have Children. Once a Pak reaches 40 or so, they are driven to consume a certain root that transforms them into an asexual Protector and it is then that they become sentient for the first time. Basically, the Protector stage is the human equivalent of old age--except super-intelligent, immortal, and possessing superhuman strength, durability, and martial prowess. A Protector's sole drive is to protect their bloodlines at all cost--necessary because the first two stages possess only animal intelligence. Once the Protectors in the Pak homeworld have eliminated all the threats to their Children and Breeders (predators, disease, famine, etc.), they turn their attention the only thing left that hinders their bloodlines: competing Pak bloodlines and their Protectors. The extreme tribalism and subsequent wars devastate the Homeworld, but a more forward-looking band escape to colonize Earth. Unfortunately, Earth, lacks that root to trigger the Protector stage so the Protectors starve and the surviving Children and Breeders evolve into us humans, who must suffer the indignities of old age, a stillborn metamorphosis of the Protector stage. Larry Nivens ties into this premise the concepts of elder &amp; ancestor worship, religion, guardian angels, the Garden of Eden and the Trees of Life &amp; Knowledge, etc. It's an original and intriguing premise, but that's pretty much all there is to it. Characters? Who cares; they're barely a mouth for exposition. Story? Doesn't matter; it's just a hanger on which to drape the idea. Setting? A bare colorless room empty save for the idea. But it's a damn good idea. If that doesn't faze you and still manages to intrigue you, I would still recommend you read the Wikipedia summary or watch  "A Look at Protector (Niven)" by sfdebris .