Rating: 2/5

I will be very honest with you: I didn't finish this. I couldn't.

As someone who spent 6 years as an English major, I am all about drawing correlations between texts and building up an argument. I'm especially for the creation of really compelling arguments, ones that make you see texts in a whole new light. This book… definitely does that, though not in a way that I can take seriously. I honestly thought it was satire by page two. Is that too harsh? (Looking back on this years later, it just has to be satire. Brilliant if it is.)

Let's put it this way: I respect the author's assertions that Pooh displays some very compelling philosophical practices. The Tao of Pooh, for example, made a very charming argument that I gravitated to and appreciated. This one, however… really reaches. Even Williams says that it's so simple that all he has to do is show the basic symbolisms and correlations that prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that Pooh is actually the grand master of truth. That's all it becomes: the honey pot is the alchemic pot, honey is gold, gold is the goal, Pooh goes up, up is enlightenment, he comes down, down is earth… It's so simple, you can't deny it! Therefore of course it must be true!

It's the way that Williams does this that grates on me. There are so many moments where he says "Other readers would draw a simplistic and lowly conclusion that Pooh is being greedy and stupid here, but this is absurd because my opinion is clearly right!" It's one thing to disagree with someone or a group of people, but he doesn't do it with any grace. He is right, the others are of low intellectual quality and are wrong, and that is that. What really got on my nerves was how Williams asserts from the very beginning that Milne's intentions were to usher us into the second millennia. It's not a suggestion, but an outright assertion that Williams makes: this was the intention of Milne. How? How do you know this? (Unless he has spoken with Milne himself, he doesn't.)

And oh, the reaching. There are far too many moments where very basic things are blown out of proportion, such as the illustration with Pooh sitting on the edge of Christopher Robin's bath. The illustrator has him looking up and away, as if, Williams feels, in some sort of rapt mystic trance. …or he could just be a stuffed bear sitting on the edge of a bath tub. 

There were plenty of compelling moments in the text, such as the assumed star signs of the characters, and a moment where Pooh is sitting on a rock looking at a dragonfly, drawing a correlation between the closeness of the constellations of the Dragon and the Great Bear. Cool! I thought. But past that, I just cannot get into the alchemy, the druids, the feminine mysteries… it goes on and on and on. I'm all for viewing Pooh as an example for us all, but this? This was just far too much... unless, of course, that's the point.