Rating: 2/5

The overall feel of the book was cyclical. I would feel frustrated or upset by the author's interpretation of situations for 9 minutes and then have a 1 minute mini-experience of hope. The hope was that should would have a rational and objective manner of assessing her many anecdotes. Instead, she regularly used the anecdotes to perpetuate her own narrative, which I will discuss later below

There were some moments when I certainly learned something. This is exciting for me. I engaged with a book that challenged my own point of view, made me uncomfortable, and I was able to learn something new by sticking it out and reading it. For example, I now have a better ability to recognize the social ritual of taking either the one-up or one-down position. Also, I acquired a better understanding of the differences in oriental social behavior in comparison to American social behavior. Lastly, I was able to confirm a working hypothesis of mine: if I tried to participate in my workplace social rituals more often, then I would cause problems for myself given the significant differences in my communication styles and my peers. Thankfully the author said not one style is right or wrong in itself.

Before reading the book, please know that the underlying framework the book is based on is power. Women being powerless, or having less power, men imposing their power, society rewarding those with power. Power, power, power. She only explicitly alludes to this briefly a few times, but a conscious eye will see the power tones throughout. If you are somebody who sees the world more often through a lens of competence or emotional needs, then you'll likely by perpetually disappointed to constant references or themes of status, power, superiority, unfairness, and inequities. 

It was interesting to see the genesis of today's feminist movement. It was far more moderate than it is today. Men were not as villanized and tradition wasn't as ridiculed. However, the skeleton of the narrative is the same: men and they institutions they have created are abusers of their power at the expense of women. Therefore, it even had a hint of liberal propaganda in it.

Enjoying this book depends entirely on your frame of reference. If you plan on reading this to learn about the raw scientific differences between men and women - wrong book. This book begins with many political premises such as women are "marked", women are vicitims, men are unfair to women, and women face a harder time in general than a man does. Therefore, the science evaluated is about 80% collected and interpreted to verify these initial premises she began with. Fortunately, 20% was good interpretation that was more honest such as describing the variable outcomes of organizing her diverse students into groups randomly, by communication style, by gender, or by ethnicity. Don't expect the majority of what she writes to be her sharing her observations and discussing the possible significance, however. Instead, she uses particular instances to validate her claims. She argues more than describes. If you're looking for a book where the author tries to make an earnest attempt (essay) at characterizing the difference between men and women talking in the workplace, don't read this and expect JUST that. You get a little bit of that. Most of what you get are the nascent sentiments which embody modern feminism.