Rating: 4/5

This book contains a wealth of information, which is wonderful especially if you have already gone through basic text books such as William Rand's Reiki. But it is was not easy for me to absorb so much new information in one sitting as some parts are too far removed from my current level of experience and understanding (centre portion of the book). So I feel there is no need to plough through every detail but that a browse-through would suffice for certain portions to gain a general idea.

What I especially like are the starting and ending portions of the book. The book begins many references of investigations done by scientists and physicists on the universal and human energy fields. This gave me a better perspective of the meeting points between what modern science now know, and what the spiritual masters past and present already knew through experience. The studies cited makes for interesting further reading for those keen to explore further.

These studies combined, seem to tell me this - that the universe and all its objects (animate or inanimate) and all the spaces in between are part of a whole, a soup of universal energy field where a part represents the whole. All are intimately connected, and these connections are synergistic, and communication can be instant and non-local. As such, there is infinite possibilities and potential to create and transform into higher forms.

I find it interesting that the book depicts chakras as 3 dimensional vortises that come in pairs (one in front of the body and other other behind). This is different from my prior understanding where chakras are seen as flat round spots as normally depicted in traditional drawings. Like cyclones, each pair of chakra spins in a balanced way in a clockwise direction if it is open and healthy, and would take in energy from the outside to replenish body. Chakras that are closed (spin counter-clockwise) or are torn would result in ill health, and that there is always a spiritual-psycho-emotional-mental dimension linked to a poorly functional chakra. This makes me seechakras in a totally new way!

I also find that the exercises at the end of the book to help prepare the healer for opening of his own acupuncture lines and to open and charge his chakras are very similar to what yoga already teaches. Which is a very good thing since I do not have to learn entirely new things, but continue with my yoga practise with renewed understanding on it's impact on the chakras.

I did not absorb the centre portion of the book much, as it contains more technical healing methods and visualisation requirements (eg for chelation) which I find difficult to fathom in real practise at the moment. For the moment, I would stick to the simpler method taught by my Reiki Master, which follow's William Rand's and the International Centre for Reiki Training's approach. If and when I develop greater sensitivity towards the human energy field in future, I would consider returning to this book for it's wealth of information. But for a novice, I think common sense and a simple approach should suffice for the moment.

I happy to have read this book, and would return to it in future if the need arises.