Rating: 3/5

"Pour yourself a drink, put on some lipstick, and pull yourself together. "

 ----Liz Taylor

Candace Bushnell, an international best-selling author, has penned a sassy tale of four blond women from Manhattan, in her book, Four Blondes that narrates the tale of four different women, independent and strong-willed, who pave their way in the jungle called life by standing strong along with the men, fashion, age, needs and fame and to claim fame, they would do anything for it.

Synopsis: 

Four Blondes charts the romantic intrigues, liaisons, betrayals and victories of four modern women: a beautiful B-list model scams rent-free summerhouses in the Hamptons from her lovers until she discovers she can get a man but can't get what she wants; a high-powered magazine columnist's floundering marriage to a literary journalist is thrown into crisis when her husband's career fails to live up to her expectations; a 'Cinderella' records her descent into paranoia in her journal as she realizes she wants anybody's life except her own; an artist and an ageing 'It girl' - who fears that her time for finding a man has run out - travels to London in search of the kind of love and devotion she can't find in Manhattan. 

A selfish and lazy ex-model, a career-minded and dominating journalist, a paranoid princess and an aging "IT girl"- all four had few things in common, they all belong from The Big Apple, all four are thoroughly selfish, all four are unexceptionally modern out of their times, and not to mention they are all blondies. So why read about these four feminist women? Well, my answer will be, if you are getting bored and wanna read something light, something like no-strings-attached, something that will give you a good laugh, then you may pick a copy of this book. Well, I won this book from Hachette India's giveaway along with a copy of Sex and the City. It may not disappoint you, considering the fact that you are an occasional reader, but serious readers like me, might tear apart this book with words of criticism. But I can hardly ever trash a author's hard work, hence, I'd like to give this book 3 stars, since I got it for free, and secondly, the book cover is really pretty. 

I can't complain about the author's writing style, its funny, sassy and way too polished. The narrative too is quite alluring and catchy with a really fast pace. The author pens this book with her trademark style of boldness, independence and feminism. The story line is layered with lots of funny anecdotes and remarks related to sexism.

Well, I was pretty aware what I was getting myself into, before reading this book. Unfortunately, the author has projected the hard truth about 21st century women. Yes these characters might sound very vague and dumb in the beginning, but mind it, women like these characters exist everywhere in the world. Not to mention these four characters are unexceptionally flawed, some are lazy, do not want to work and wanna depend on their lover's filthy money to sustain them through the summers, or some are tremendously hard-working and egotistic about their jobs and constantly dominating their husbands and criticizing their jobs or some love to act paranoid or some is desperate to settle for less.

In short, this book is strictly not for serious readers, even though you are a serious reader who loves chick-lits with quality, but this book does not hold any quality instead, it has lots of SEX, and if you enjoy that, do grab a copy of this book for sure.

Verdict:  Modern times or shameless times?? The author has marvelously featured some of the independent blond women as an object of sex or rather say, she has paraded them like S**Ts all through out the city of Manhattan and London.