Rating: 3/5

I vividly remember the first time I read this book: I was just starting graduate school, and I had arrived in Houston, Texas, exhausted and strung out from a long summer of working nights and having too many romances. I had about a week before school started, and as I didn't know anyone, I spent most of the time comfort reading the type of novel I knew that I would not be assigned in my English literature course. I remember lying on my quilt, being semi-cooled by the blast of an old-fashioned air conditioning unit, and reading myself into a sort of stupor. There was no hint of autumn in the late summer Houston air, but I got a nice romantic dose of it in this book. 

Pilcher is a great storyteller, and she writes books which are very 'moreish'. She is very adept at writing vivid characters of all ages and balancing several interrelated story-lines. I suspect that most of the appeal of her books is down to the atmosphere, though. Although this book has some early scenes in London and Majorca, the majority of it takes place in Strathcroy, Scotland. Highlands country. The Balmerinos and the Airds are the main landowning families in the area, and this novel is very much about their small and intersecting clans. There are a number of conflicts and dramas upsetting the peace; interestingly, the only one I recalled was the one between Virginia and her much older husband Edmund Aird. Edmund wants to send their 8 year old son Henry away to boarding school, while Virginia is very much against this plan. Another major story-line revolves around the 'glamorous' character of Pandora Balmerino, who is a sort of prodigal daughter. Having run away from home at age 18, Pandora decides (mysteriously and quixotically) to return to her childhood home of Balnaid for a dance. Violet Aird is the matriarch of the clan, and very much in the style of Penelope Keeling (the beloved heroine of The Shell Seekers). Fans of The Shell Seekers will enjoy the return of Noel Keeling, Penelope's spoiled youngest child, who becomes the love interest of Alexa Aird.

I will admit to this: I read this book in a mood of needing a nice, absorbing comfort read and it fit the bill. I consumed it almost as avidly as I did 25 years ago. However, several aspects of the plot and characterisation rankled this time. There are way too many women being wonderfully domestic and putting up with annoyingly dictatorial men. Aspects of the plot, like the Northern Ireland storyline involving Archie Balmerino date it some extent, but the female characters date it more worryingly, at least from my point of view. 3.5 stars