Rating: 4/5

This was possibly my least enjoyed out of the group I've recently finished reading. There's loads of sex, about ROUGH, tough - dare I say minimally educated people - in the great Wyoming wilderness. Proulx spreads her stories through time - so there is a quirky story about a horse presumably, chewing off the legs of a cowboy - because horse and men are all huddled together in a cabin to avoid the intense night cold; others are possibly mid-century and some right up to date - with the famous - 'Broke Back Mountain' featuring as the last story. This I was disappointed with - having already seen the film - which follows the original story - blow for blow - and doesn't add a single new or erroneous detail - so I couldn't help but find the story falling short of expectations.

I did, however, love the ROUGH hard, details and convincing descriptions of those high desert and mountain places of Wyoming. I visited the Canadian Rockies some years ago - and I recognized the same feeling on reading Proulx's landscapes - the same kind of questions popping into my head - how does anything or anyone survive out here - there? 

You stand there, braced. Cloud shadows race over the buff rock stacks as a projected film, casting a queasy, mottled ground rash. The air hisses and it is no local breeze but the great harsh sweep of wind from the turning earth. The wild country - indigo jags of mountain, grassy plain everlasting, tumbled stones like fallen cities, the flaring roll of sky - provokes a spiritual shudder. It is like a deep note that cannot be heard but is felt, it is like a claw in the gut.

I also think this book should come with a warning - the main word that you want to use is BRUTAL, along with Rough - so if you're squeamish, don't like blood, accidents - that kind of thing - be warned. Here's a bit of Raw Brutality:

"There you go," said the doctor. "Dislocated shoulder. Humerus displaced forwards from the shoulder socket. All right, I'm going to try to reposition the humerus." The doctor's chin was against the back of his shoulder, his hands taking the useless arm, powerful smell of tobacco. "This will hurt for a minute. I'm going to manipulate this-"
"Jesus CHRIST!" The pain was excruciating and violent. The tears rolled down his hot face and he couldn't help it.
"Cowboy up," said the doctor sardonically.

(There is a white space and then in the next para - a different type of brutality.)

Pake Bitts walked in, looked at him with interest.
"Got hung up, hah? I didn't see it but they said you got hung up pretty good. Twenty-eight seconds. They'll put you on the videos. Thunderstorm out there." He was damp from the shower, last week's scab still riding his upper lip and a fresh raw scrape on the side of his jaw. He spoke to the doctor. "Throw his shoulder out? Can he drive? It's his turn a drive. We got a be in south Texas two o'clock tomorrow afternoon."

One of the ways you can make a living in this part of the world - Proulx is making her point. But I like the fact she is at pains to draw our attention to the cattle ranchers - the big guys - who never actually visit the farms in 'Pair of Spurs'. They exploit water, soils and humans in their focus on the highest possible dollar sales - so her stories - which I suppose are based on research and reality -plus the fact that she lives there - provide insider information.

She also glances in her story, 'The Governors of Wyoming' on Indigenous people - where a man walking on the highway, deftly removes the car keys from a rich rancher, a key character - Shy, and asks him what he wants. Shy wants a young girl - and the Indian complies with his wishes - for a fee. So, the point about her stories - there are layers of reality - layers of history, the interconnections of different people - all contributing to the present reality of this American State.

I liked it. I don't know whether I Enjoyed it. That first story - I knew what was coming, and I barely had the stomach to keep reading - 'The Half-Skinned Steer' - this story pivots on the animal's point of view.

I started watching "Unforgiven" last night - Clint's pivotal Western - for which he was awarded the Oscars for his alternative perspective - and I suppose Proulx is following on in this direction - I want to award her - it was certainly a preferable read to McMurtry's 'Lonesome Dove'.