Rating: 2/5

I tried, I really did. I engaged my brain, or attempted to, but it said "give me a break," and tuned out. I had quite enjoyed What Einstein Told His Cook: Kitchen Science Explained and What Einstein Told His Cook 2: The Sequel: Further Adventures in Kitchen Science but this was beyond my little brain (sorry brain). What really pissed me off was his long and very detailed explanation of why Crookes Radiometer spins in the light. He says that all the explanations are actually wrong. Then goes on to say no-one actually knows how it works. So why fucking waste my time then?

It was all downhill from there. At about the middle of the book I'd had enough. Life is too short for being pissed off at something that doesn't hold my attention long enough to see if I understand it or not (not, is the likely answer). Another thing, with all the books, is that I'm not that keen on the author. He writes in a voice that is I know you didn't ask but I'm sure you'd want to know, and kind of talking down to people who aren't as educated in science as he is. Like, "I have to dumb it down for all you people and I'll try and use words of no more than two syllables." (He didn't say that, it was just the tone of the book).

There was one really interesting nugget though:

If you wear suncream, say spf 20, spf 40 only contains about 3% more sun-filtering ingredients. Spf 20 blocks 93% of UVB rays, spf 50 98% and after that they are just screwing with your mind and purse, there is no meaningful increase in protection meaning you can't really stay out that much longer. The spf figure refers to UVB radiation protection, not UVA which is also a guilty party in burning and cancer. For real protection you need to get a broad spectrum suncream which protects against UVA as well. However, the main reason you burn despite using cream is that most people only use about half as much as needed. It feels right, who wants to slather on teaspoonsful? But that's what's needed. (I didn't get all of this from the book but enough of it to send me to verify this small percentage increase on medical sites).