Rating: 5/5

A truly wonderful book, that I don't mind telling you made me cry like a baby.

"Nobody leaves Wyoming unless they have to," Annie Proulx. I'm pleased I waited until I had to leave Wyoming to read this book, despite it stirring powerful feelings of homesickness. I had encountered 1-2 Proulx stories in the New Yorker before now, I had loved the film version of Brokeback Mountain, and of course, I lived in Laramie for a decade where Proulx is something of a quiet celebrity.

The passage quoted below, from 'People in Hell Just Want A Drink of Water' is, for me, at the heart of this collection. Proulx's characterization is second-to-none (better, perhaps, than even Stephen King, whose characters are among the best crafted in all of American lit.), and yet, despite the accuracy, and feeling with which she crafts her characters, their stories are often disjointed and incomplete. This is because, people, culture, civilization, all of this shrinks when you stand on the prairie in the shadow of the mountains and you feel that Wyoming wind, "no local breeze, but the great harsh sweep of wind from the turning of the earth." 

"Dangerous and indifferent ground: against its fixed mass the tragedies of people count for nothing although the signs of misadventure are everywhere. No past slaughter nor cruelty, no accident nor murder that occurs on the little ranches or at the isolate crossroads with their bare populations of three or seventeen, or in the reckless trailer courts of mining towns delays the flood of morning light. Fences, cattle, roads, refineries, mines, gravel pits, traffic lights, graffiti'd celebration of athletic victory on bridge overpass, crust of blood of the Wal-Mart loading dock, the sun-faded wreaths of plastic flowers marking death on a highway are ephemeral. Other cultures have camped here a while and disappeared. Only earth and sky matter. Only the endlessly repeated flood of morning light. You begin to see that God does not owe us much beyond that."
 
P.S.
And, if my recommendation has persuaded you to read Close Range, but you're wondering what to listen to while doing so, well, then let me recommend the perfect playlist. It will enhance, not distract, from Annie Proulx's eternal, melancholic Wyoming.

Close Range: (A Literary Soundtrack)

Nick Cave's 'Music from: The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford'

"A Good Man is Hard to Find", "An Old Watermill by a Waterfall", and "A Thousand Goodnights" - Milton Brown (Milton Brown and His Musical Brownies)

"Nebraska" - Bruce Springsteen (Nebraska)

"The Sky Above, the Mud Below" and "Prairie in the Sky" - Tom Russell (Song of the West)

"Good Run &amp; Good Luck" - Clint Black (No Time To Kill)

"Honky Tonk Man" and "Guitars, Cadillacs" - Dwight Yoakum (Guitars, Cadillacs, Etc. Etc.)

Various Artists' 'Brokeback Mountain (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack)'

Nick Cave's 'The Proposition'