Rating: 4/5

This is a weird book. There's no other way to describe it: it's extremely strange. It's one of Siri Hustvedt's earlier novels, originally published in 1996, seven years before her masterpiece What I Loved. What surprised me the most about The Enchantment of Lily Dahl is how different in tone it is to What I Loved and Hustvedt's subsequent novels. It doesn't quite feel like it was written by someone else - there's a discernible similarity in style, particularly evident in the constant pervading sense of unease - but the characters and scenarios presented in this book are just so unlike anything I've come across in Hustvedt's later work. It keeps criss-crossing between the real and the surreal, until neither the reader nor the characters are sure what's truly happened, and the titular protagonist begins to question her own memory and even her sense of self. 

Lily Dahl is a 19-year-old aspiring actress who spends her days working in the Ideal Café and her evenings rehearsing for a local amateur production of A Midsummer Night's Dream. She has a close friendship with her elderly neighbour, Mabel, and a burgeoning obsession with Ed, an artist from New York who lives (and paints) in a hotel across the street. The first major event of the book occurs when Lily decides to spontaneously strip in front of her window to attract Ed's attention, and shortly afterwards, she embarks on an intense (but uncommunicative) affair with him. I expected the remainder of the book to be all about this relationship and Lily's sexual awakening, but actually, the story is actually more concerned with the peculiar confines of small-town American life. Lily observes the oddball inhabitants of her strangely claustrophobic hometown, Webster, on a daily basis, and inevitably becomes drawn into their lives. Somewhere along the way, an indistinct mystery surfaces, dredging up Lily's childhood memories along with the potentially sinister truth behind a local urban legend. 

At points I was just confused - for example, I couldn't understand why Lily would even speak to the bizarre Martin, let alone agree to go anywhere alone with him. I didn't dislike Lily, but to say that this whole story was all about her, she seemed a very shallow character and I never felt I'd really got to the bottom of what motivated many of her actions. The ending was a major disappointment - I simply could not believe Ed would really come back for Lily, turn out to be madly in love with her (after failing to demonstrate this previously), ask her to move to New York with him, etc. Why shoehorn a fairytale, chick-lit-esque romantic resolution into such peculiar, experimental fiction? I think the whole story would have been much stronger without this element, and even though the final conclusion was somewhat ambiguous, I would have preferred to see Lily's fate left completely open. 

I'm glad I read this, because I'm very interested in Hustvedt's oeuvre as a whole, but I can't say that it was, in itself, particularly satisfying: it's a middling early book from a great writer, not a great book in its own right. I loved the recurrent hints of strangeness - the best and most exciting parts came when Lily questioned the reality of what she had seen, and the reader was encouraged to think her perspective might not be entirely reliable - but didn't feel that they were properly followed through. The Enchantment of Lily Dahl is an interesting curiosity, but probably best suited to existing fans of the author rather than newcomers to her work.