Rating: 4/5

I confess. My introduction to Michael Ondaatje back in 2012 was The English Patient, and I really didn’t like it. I rated it one star; I hardly ever do that. I did like the movie, though. I waited nine years to read anything else by Ondaatje, which was Warlight. I loved it: five stars. I concluded at the time and am still of the opinion that I was just at the wrong place in life to read The English Patient and need to give it another try. In the Skin of a Lion gave me more to think about. A third of the way through this novel I was struggling, frustrated and would have rated the novel mediocre. By the end, though, I had come to thoroughly enjoy it. This novel helped me recognize that it is Ondaatje’s prose that both challenges me and in which I find great joy. 

Published in 1987, In the Skin of a Lion is the story of Patrick Lewis as he finds his way in Canada in the first third of the 20th century. As a teenager, Patrick helps his father, Hazen, dynamite logjams in the river, so that the logs keep moving downstream. When work on the river is no longer available, Hazen applies his dynamite knowledge in a feldspar mine until he is unlucky and dies doing the work. Patrick, at the age of 21, moves to Toronto. He works in a series of jobs, alongside many foreign-born laborers, digging a tunnel under Lake Ontario and in a tannery. These foreign-born workers get the lowest-paying, deadliest and otherwise unhealthiest jobs that no one else wants. During the Depression many thousands of foreign-born workers are deported. Patrick meets and falls in love with Clara Dickens, who is politically involved in protecting the interests of workers, but Clara leaves Patrick for another man and Patrick becomes despondent. 

Patrick is relating this story, his story, the story of Clara and Clara’s best friend, Alice, to his daughter Hana as they drive through the night. There is so much more to this story, and there is so much that you have to infer. For me, that is the challenging part of reading Ondaatje. There are narrative sections that are as clear, concise and linear as any I have read. But then Ondaatje will move the story around in time, sometimes providing a signal to the reader, and you are grasping to understand. He also introduces sequences that are dream-like; should I take these as descriptions of real events, dreams, or as products of the narrator’s imagination. Hard to say. The frustration came before I adjusted to the narrative style; once I adapted, my enjoyment of the story increased significantly. 

Selfishly, I am attempting to describe Ondaatje’s prose style so that if I can remember to read this review before my next Ondaatje novel I will be prepared. I won’t spend so much time trying to keep my head above water but will be on my mental toes.