Rating: 4/5

I appreciated this almost as well as the third in her collection of “Wyoming Stories”,  Fine Just the Way It Is . There is a lot of variety among the eleven stories, but it has cohesion from the Wyoming setting and common struggles of people there to achieve their dreams, whether it’s ranching or rodeo bull riding. They keep you on your toes, as some stories end with a bang and others with a whimper, some stay coast downward in gritty reality and others break into the fantasy of a ghost story or mythic shaggy dog tale. 

Like most other readers, my favorite story is the one with the most emotional draw, “Brokeback Mountain.” I am not usually a fan of short stories because I always seem to want more. But the compression of this form has some special power to wallop you by forcing your own imagination to fill in the blanks. Having seen the long lingering scenes of the movie spoiled some of that power of the story for me. Still, it was wonderful to experience the narrative version of some of the more powerful points of the tale (the first embraces, the mad kiss on reuniting years later in the eyesight of Ennis’ wife, and the poignant scene at the end when Ennis visits Jack’s boyhood room). It really seems that the world was waiting for this account of gay men out of synch with the manly world of the West, and it seems quite an achievement for a woman to pull off with such power and economy

The other story that moved me the most was the one about the bull-rider, Diamond Felts in “The Mud Below”. I could identify with the allure of rodeo glory from the dreams of my fellow students where I grew up in a tiny town in Oklahoma, where the only other prospect seemed to be working in an oil refinery. Proulx makes you empathize with Diamond’s pitiful home life and his attraction to the drug of success at rodeo riding. As the seedy parts of that life begin to take hold, empathy turns to pity, and then, wham, his treatment of women reveals the tip of the iceberg in the form of the monster in his heart. It makes me want to sing: “Mama, don’t let your babies grow up to be cowboys. Let them be doctors and lawyers and such”:

 He almost always has a girl in the motel bed with him when he could afford a motel, a half-hour painkiller but without the rush and thrill he got from a bullride. There was no sweet time when it was over. He wanted them to get gone. …
There was no one in his life to slow him down with love. Sometimes riding the bull was the least part of it, but only the turbulent ride gave him the indescribable rush, shot him with mainline with crazy-ass elation. In the arena everything was real because none of it was real except the chance to get dead.
 
The big draw for me with this book is not in the quirky plots but Proulx’s writing style, which other people either love or hate. If you want to get a real earful from the latter camp, check out B.R. Myers’  A Reader's Manifesto: An attack on the growing pretentiousness of American literary prose . He is not happy with how she will unroll a clashing nest of metaphors like a machine gun (to use a metaphor). I find the technique exhilarating, somewhat like the energy that burst forth at a poetry slam. Judge for yourself:

"The Half-Skinned Steer" (which first appeared in The Atlantic Monthly, in November of 1997), starts with this sentence: ‘In the long unfurling of his life, from tight-wound kid hustler in a wool suit riding the train out of Cheyenne to geriatric limper in this spooled-out year, Mero had kicked down thoughts of the place where he began, a so-called ranch on strange ground at the south hinge of the Big Horns.’ Like so much modern prose, this demands to be read quickly, with just enough attention to register the bold use of words. Slow down, and things fall apart. Proulx seems to have intended a unified conceit, but unfurling, or spreading out, as of a flag or an umbrella, clashes disastrously with the images of thread that follow. (Maybe "unraveling" didn't sound fancy enough.) A life is unfurled, a hustler is wound tight, a year is spooled out, and still the metaphors continue, with kicked down—which might work in less crowded surroundings, though I doubt it—and hinge, which is cute if you've never seen a hinge or a map of the Big Horns. And this is just the first sentence!

At the bottom of his carping is an argument that her efforts at style interfere with immersion in the story:
 … after a while the reader stops trying to think about what the metaphors mean. Maybe this is the effect that Proulx is aiming for; she seems to want to keep us on the surface of the text at all times, as if she were afraid that we might forget her quirky narratorial presence for even a line or two.

My objection to this is that her wordplay for me doesn’t call attention to the writer’s presence any more than a jazz riff interferes with hearing the music instead of imagining the composer. By analogy, you could say Picasso was a stylist with a lot of focus on surface forms, but that doesn’t interfere with the narrative impact in the case of the civilian bombing in his “Guernica.” To use another metaphor, the beginning sentence quoted above seems to me like dancing with abandon out on thin ice before letting the reader sink through into the story. Works for me.