Rating: 3/5

Sometimes described as the first great German novel, Simplicissimus is a big, flatulent, romping picaresque that careens its way across the patchwork of German states at the height of the Thirty Years War. In its mixture of realist war commentary, knockabout scatology, and magic-realist flights of fancy, it comes across as something like Rabelais meets Goya's Disasters of War.

Our eponymous hero – nicknamed for his naïveté – is born in the Spessart, and grows up in a little farming hamlet which is unfortunate enough to be in the path of some marauding soldiers, who promptly kill the men in a variety of inventive ways before raping the women. Simplicissimus, as a child, is spared long enough to escape to live wild in the forest. The harsh naturalism of these early scenes, and others like them throughout the book, is still genuinely shocking, and has a documentary interest; much of it is thought to be autobiographical. From there, our ingenuous hero travels up to Westphalia and down to the Breisgau, with excursions to France, Switzerland, and the centre of the earth, fighting at various times on both sides of the conflict.

Like many picaresque novels, Simplicissimus presents the world as a place of endless opportunity, novelty and adventure; and yet the wartime realities give it a grounding in real life, and a consequent seriousness, that I find somewhat missing in, say, its more famous contemporary Don Quixote. Though occasionally moralistic, it's never boring, if only because the genre shifts almost as often as the setting – from satire to fantasy to religious allegory to shaggy-dog story. One minute he's expatiating on the importance of Christian virtues, the next he's devoting a whole chapter to how he farted at an inopportune moment.

At times too it is fascinatingly subversive. Despite all the fighting, the only real description of wartime combat we get is a parodic one, when Simplicissimus goes off alone into the woods to kill the lice infesting his body:

I took off the cuirass, even though others put one on before going into battle and started such a massacre that soon my two swords – my thumb-nails – were dripping with blood and covered in dead bodies. Those I could not kill I sent into exile, wandering under the tree.

And his status as eternal innocent allows him to ask the religious questions that no one else can; when a Reformed minister demands that he recognise the truth of his denomination, Simplicissimus objects immediately:

‘But, pastor,’ I answered, ‘that is what all the other churches say of their faith as well. Which one should I believe? […] Which one should I join when each is screaming that the others are the work of the devil?’

The translation from Mike Mitchell is just fantastic, employing a complex, often specialist vocabulary which reads completely fluently while also giving plenty of seventeenth century flavour. (Unfortunately, there are some editing mistakes – ‘gaol’ has been replaced by ‘goal’ in every instance, apparently by some overzealous spellchecker, and similarly we read more than once of someone getting their ‘just desserts’, which rather puts me in mind of people being punished with bowls of Angel Delight.) In any case, this strange and exuberant novel is of much more than historical interest – full of life, and learning, and delights that have been snatched from a capricious world. A world closer to us than we sometimes remember.