Rating: 2/5

After reading The Sweet Hereafter I expected to be on a Russell Banks kick. I LOVED The Sweet Hereafter - it is such an amazing book. I loved the form of interviews that Banks used to tell the story. And then I read this. Rule of the Bone was a real let down for me. I'd even call it a disappointment. It felt so false, so contrived. 

Prior to reading this book, I saw the film adaptation of The Sweet Hereafter and listened to Banks speak after. He said he felt Rule of the Bone and T.S.H., if he had his way, would be paired together, to be read as one book. R.O.T.B. being a sequel, if you will, to T.S.H. That they shared similar themes of not caring for our (America's) children, and characters. I was so excited. I couldn't wait. But alas, ROTB was just awful. The narrator, which Banks also referred to as his Holden Caulfield, was completely unreliable, and not in a good way. I believed nothing that this character did, or said. I believe none of things that happened to him could ever, or would ever, happen. The voice? Awful. It just didn't ring true. It felt forced. As a reader, I merely envisioned Banks sitting at his desk saying "Yes! Brilliant! This is EXACTLY the way a teen boy thinks. The way he speaks. What a genius I am." 

On to plot. Bad. Very. Bad. It was as though Banks made all the easy choices. I couldn't figure out if Banks was trying this as a device, if he was purposefully setting this character up as a kind of "everyman" - getting into every imaginable nook and cranny, every hardship - to make a point. But as the book went on, I realized that I think Banks just wanted to wrap it all up in a neat package. The character actually went to Jamaica, where low and behold, he found his....long lost father! What???? Up until this point I was hanging on, willing Banks to not go this route. I just couldn't believe it. 

I could go on, but I'll choose to stop here. I stand by TSH - it is such a wonderful book. It made such an impact on me. Read that one, but please, leave ROTB on the shelf.