Rating: 3/5

Ok, I was seriously worried that all of Stackpole's X-Wing books would get only one or two stars from me. I am happy to say that "Wedge's Gamble" surprised me, and I was able to give it a whopping THREE stars. Glory, glory.

Don't get me wrong, Stackpole is still a pretty seriously shitty writer, but somehow it doesn't matter quite as much in this instalment, which deals, among other things, with the Rebellion's attempts to conquer Coruscant.

Now, before we get to the good stuff, my problem with Stackpole's writing, as detailed in my review of the previous instalment, boils down to three main things:

1. The writing itself, we're talking grammar, vocabulary, sentence structure, and the like, is not particularly professional. Sometimes sentences are so awkwardly written that you have to go through them a couple times before their meaning becomes clear. This becomes especially irritating when reading the in-flight battle scenes. These often take me quite some time to get through.

2. Stackpole insists on pressing a good deal of his exposition into conversations between characters. This makes for contrived exposition, and extremely awkard conversations. Here's how I see one of those exchanges going with at least one character who knows how to have an actual conversation:

Wedge: "So, Leia, remember how you're a princess, how you were one of the leaders of the Rebellion, and how you were a member of the Imperial senate?"

Leia: "Um ... yes. I'm me. I know all that stuff."

Wedge: "Also, remember how you kinda like Han Solo?"

Leia: "Again, I was actually there in person for this stuff. I don't need you to -"

Wedge: "Oh, and remember how Luke's your brother and he's a jedi and stuff?"

Leia: "I'm leaving now."

3. I'm pretty sure Stackpole's a bit of a misogynist. Absolutely ALL of his female characters, regardless of age or race, are described as slender and beautiful (and not only beautiful, mind you, most of them are described as nothing short of breathtaking). It seems that Stackpole is entirely unaware of the fact that women come in all shapes and sizes, and can, in fact, be perfectly ordinary looking and still be badass. The men, of course, are permitted all kinds of shapes and sizes, but the women naturally have to be sexually desirable. ALL THE TIME. Also, most of the women with whom Corran has any kind of relationship tend to be described in terms of how much he may or may not want to fuck them. For a female reader, this gets kind of frustrating, not to mention incredibly one-dimentional.

Ok, I'm done.

Now, for the good stuff.

Where the previous instalment often fast forwarded over a lot of the elements that led up to the battles, and where the only build-up was, often, the previously mentioned awkwardly expositionary dialogues, "Wedge's Gamble" actually spends time taking the reader through the in-between stuff. This makes the climaxes that much more exciting, and we get to know the characters a lot better, so we actually start to care about what happens to them (always a plus).

The plot is also more multifaceted, which makes it more intriguing. You see the Rebellion trying to find its feet with its new conquest of Borleias, you have political intrigue, you have the attempted overthrow of the Empire on Coruscant, and then you have the Krytos virus, engineered by the Empire to target non-humans.

This book is more fast-paced and, overall, easier and more enjoyable to read. The plot has really piqued my interest at this point, too, particularly as regards the Krytos virus, and I'm actually excited to continue reading.