Rating: 4/5

Star Wars Legends Project #325

Background: Wedge's Gamble was written by Michael A. Stackpole and published in May of 1996. It is the second of the X-Wing series of novels (five of which were written by Stackpole). Stackpole has also written and co-written a number of other Star Wars things across various media.

Wedge's Gamble takes place about three years after the Battle of Endor (7 years after the battle of Yavin), and begins a month after the conclusion of Rogue Squadron (my review). The main characters are Corran Horn, Wedge Antilles, Tycho Celchu, and the other surviving pilots of Rogue Squadron, along with major appearances by Mirax Terrik, Iella Wessiri, Winter, and others. The villains include Ysanne Isard and Kirtan Loor. The story takes place in a few locations, but mostly on Coruscant.

Summary: Thanks to Rogue Squadron's improbable success in their first mission as a unit, the stage has been set for a strike at the seat of galactic power on Coruscant itself. But first, they'll need a way to compromise the planetary shields without destroying them. With their ability to assess the victory conditions from a pilot perspective, the job falls to Rogue Squadron and a ragtag group of dubious allies. Little do they know, Ysanne Isard is laying a trap that, if triggered, will consume the entire New Republic.

Review: This is where the foundation Stackpole laid with Rogue Squadron really starts paying off. The major characters are established, and he starts building out an even larger and equally-compelling supporting cast. Combine this with the action, suspense, and intrigue of the New Republic's conquest of Coruscant and you have the recipe for an absolutely top-notch Star Wars book.

If I have one complaint (and this was not something I remember noticing the first time I read the book), it's that several events in the story lean pretty heavily on a level of coincidence that stretches suspension of disbelief to the breaking point. This is, after all, a planet-wide city with trillions of people, but somehow multiple major scenes hinge on characters just randomly bumping into each other (in one case very literally) because they happen to end up in the same place at the same time for no really good reason.

That aside, it's really amazing how much this book accomplishes in a compact space. There are so many moving parts, so many characters, so many objectives, but it never feels like Stackpole has bitten off more than he can chew. He lands every set piece, every plot point, and every sudden twist in a way that is thrilling and engaging, and doesn't ever feel over-explained or rushed. The X-Wing series has fully come into its own with this book.

A-