Rating: 5/5

I had given up on Eva Ibbotson – but I'm glad to say that I was mistaken. I utterly adored this book – and laughed out loud more than once! I cannot put into words how much I liked this book but I'll try anyway.

Ruth is a sweet, charming and very charismatic heroine who attracts everyone who meets her. She’s the daughter of Professor Berger and grows up in Vienna. When the Nazis take over she’s leaving ahead of her family on a student visa, but she's sent back and the rest of the family is gone. Luckily she meets Quin, her father's protégé who just got an honorary doctorate in Vienna. He cannot leave her in Vienna and the only escape is through a marriage of convenience, to be dissolved as soon as they reach London. Only it turns out that it wasn't that easy to dissolve a marriage – and somehow Ruth ends up in his class at the university. But Ruth was supposed to get engage to Heini, a concert pianist trying to escape from Budapest, and Verena Plackett who's also in the class, the Vice Chancellor's daughter, plans on marrying Quin herself.

The story is set during the beginning of the Second World War, and it's in the background throughout the book. Eva Ibbotson was a refugee from Vienna in London and you can tell she’s in her element. The book takes place at the university and personally I really liked all the science references. It also provides some deeper insights into the culture and life during this time, and also into the life of refugees coming to a new country having left all behind.

Previously I have had trouble with Eva Ibbotson in A Countess Below Stairs and A Company of Swans in which she wrote out the romance instead of letting the characters act it out but this story was completely different! Ruth and Quin have plenty of interactions and it's through these we start suspect that there might be something between them even though they haven't caught up.

I loved almost everything about this book. I loved the lead couple – their interactions, bantering and slow realization that they might love each other after all. The plot was exciting, the setting exquisite and an immense story structure. I read an older version which I borrowed from the library and I think this might be better than the new one (the previous book I read was full of typos and strange translations – here there was nothing of this sort). There were great twists and turns and I was super excited to find out how (or if) they were going to end up in their happily ever after. I would recommend this to everyone!