Rating: 5/5

There are few authors whose works bring me as much pleasure as Thomas Mann. This continues to be the case with this all too short (and all too incomplete) book. 

Mann was working on this when he died in 1955 – I’m sure this information is out there (Mann is significant enough of a literary figure, that – like Joyce and Eliot and other titans of 20th century literature – he is documented almost to the point of exhaustion) though I’ve yet to run across it: I can’t help but wondering what Mann intended for this book. “The Early Years” designation would seem to suggest that this was the first entry of some sort of larger series; even with this book – clocking in at 384 pages – it’s not clear how long the work was intended to be. I mean, 384 pages is not necessarily a short book, but it feels like Mann is just starting to hit his stride in the last 100 or so pages of the book – his prose begins to become much more philosophical and poetic as Krull begins to travel – and from a narrative perspective it feels like he’s barely begun to document Krull’s life as a “confidence man”; Krull is barely two months into his travels; and just around a year into having left home. The potential for expansion and continuation is fairly staggering. The book itself ends abruptly – though it manages to end on both a humorous beat, as well as a nice cliff hanger for the avid reader – and all I wanted there at the end was for it to continue, to go on; and as a reader I am sad that it will never be complete.

It was only after I read this that I realized it was a continuation of a short story Mann had written – once I recognized that I remembered that of all the stories in the Death in Venice collection (that Vintage put out) the story this is based on was the true standout of the collection. In fact, it would be a number of years after I read that collection that I would return to Mann, as I found myself a bit underwhelmed by most of the stories. It goes absolutely without saying – but I’ll say it anyways – that I am overjoyed that I returned to Mann eventually, as his oeuvre is simply stunning; I cannot imagine my literary life without him.

I was worried starting this book that I would not like it as much without Woods as the translator, but Mann’s writing is as wonderful as ever here; Mann himself was too talented of a writer to overly suffer a lesser translation; so while this was not as good as the Woods’ stuff, it is an accomplished enough work that it shines through. But the real jewel of the book is the character of Krull himself; his narrative voice is a joy to read; he is funny, witty, and observant in a way that manages to disclose an overwhelming amount of details (as Mann loves to do) while always flowing at a brisk clip. This book retains the compulsive readability and feeling of being over much too quickly that Mann’s other later works (Joseph and His Brothers, Doctor Faustus) also had; and though it never rises to the heights of those later books, it should still be considered an essential read for lovers of Mann. 
  "Sleep soundly. Dream of Being and of Life. Dream of the whirling galaxies which, since they are there, bear with joy the labour of their existence. Dream of the shapely arm with its ancient armature of bones, and of the flowers of the field that are able, aided by the sun, to break up lifeless matter and incorporate it into their living bodies. And don’t forget to dream of stone, of a mossy stone in a mountain brook that has lain for thousands upon thousands of years cooled, bathed, and scoured by foam and flood. Look upon its existence with sympathy, Being at its most alert gazing upon Being in its profoundest sleep, and salute it in the name of Creation! All’s well when Being and Well-Being are in some measure reconciled. A very good night!"