Rating: 5/5

I picked this book up because of the title from a used book sale. I'm a Colorado girl who thought it would be interesting to read about an English lady exploring my neck of the woods back in 1873. I was not wrong. I was enthralled with this book and Isabella Lucy Bird. Miss Bird tells this story through letters that were written to her sister back in England and first published in 1878. Miss Bird was a solo world traveler and on her way back from visiting the Hawaiian Islands (then called the Sandwich Islands) she was determined to see Estes Park, now home to Rocky Mountain National Park, in the Colorado Territory aka The Wild West. Determined to see it on her terms though a lady of some means she did not take the easy way by any stretch of the imagination and almost all her travel was done on her own, very seldom did she have a guide or company. She took a train from San Francisco, California to Cheyenne, Wyoming and from there rode horseback, rather than a train or wagon, to The Greeley Temperance Colony then on to Fort Collins in September of 1873. Constantly being told that she'd never make Estes Park due to winter coming. Not only did she make it to Estes Park she summitted Long's Peak (not 5 years from its initial ascent). Not to end her adventure there; she goes on to Denver, Colorado Springs, Manitou Springs, Divide, Boulder, Longmount, Georgetown, Golden City and back to Estes Park. She is much more a fan of the small towns and nature than the bustling dirty cities and all their profanity. It was fascinating to hear about places I know so well and how much and how little they have changed in the past 150 years. She was somewhat of a celebrity at the time and met a number of the more important people in the area, which I recognized as the names on streets, high schools, etc. in the area. Miss Bird is a lover of nature and that comes through in all of her writing. She is also a woman of her time and her thoughts on Indians are not kind, and you are well reminded of the pre- PC world. 

The Americans will never solve the Indian problem till the Indian is extinct. They have treated them after a fashion which has intensified their treachery and "devilry" as enemies, and as friends reduces them to a degraded pauperism, devoid of the very first elements of civilization. The only difference between the savage and the civilized Indian is that the latter carries firearms and gets drunk on whisky. The Indian Agency has been a sink of fraud and corruption; it is said that barely thirty per cent of the allowance ever reaches those for whom it is voted; and the complaints of shoddy blankets, damaged flour, and worthless firearms are universal. "To get rid of the Injuns" is the phrase used everywhere. Even their "reservations" do not escape seizure practically; for if gold "breaks out" on them they are "rushed," and their possessors are either compelled to accept land farther west or are shot off and driven off. One of the surest agents in their destruction is vitriolized whisky. An attempt has recently been made to cleanse the Augean stable of the Indian Department, but it has met with signal failure, the usual result in America of every effort to purify the official atmosphere. Americans specially love superlatives. The phrases "biggest in the world," "finest in the world," are on all lips. Unless President Hayes is a strong man they will soon come to boast that their government is composed of the "biggest scoundrels" in the world.

I highly recommend this book for any Coloradoan or lover of adventure.