Rating: 4/5

Reinhold Messner...a name that I exclusively associate with his mountaineering accomplishments. Or did, until I saw this title.

The man is a living legend in the climbing community. He was the first to summit Everest without supplemental oxygen in 1978, something up till then thought to be impossible. He went on to be the 1st to top out on all 14 of the world's peaks standing over 8000 meters. Many biographers call him the greatest mountaineer of his generation, which is probably true. And that's how I've always thought of him. Inspirational.

Which is why a book called "The Quest for the Yeti" by...Reinhold Messner??...knocked me way off guard, and yet stoked my curiosity, and I wanted to read it immediately. Every person looking for the yeti (or Bigfoot, UFO's, or the Loch Ness Monster) might as well be looking for the boogeyman. It is an unfortunate existential condition. Whenever I see a headline or a TV special, or heaven help us a Reality Show, complete with "researchers" and "testimonials", I shake my head. At the Unfortunate Sensationalist. Some poor soul has gotten so lost in this world, a world so super-saturated with "civilization", that meaning, wonder itself, is sought after in the shadows of superstition. Again, which is why a book called "The Quest for the Yeti"...by REINHOLD MESSNER???...say what now!

I can breathe a sigh of relief, our hero has not fallen. This book seems to be Messner's self-sought exoneration in the public eye, from just such a perception...and from a momentary lapse in judgment at a post-Makalu press conference.

On a backcountry hike through the wilds of Tibet, Messner encountered an unknown creature in the dusky forest--walking on two feet, covered in hair, and lithe beyond human capability. Aware of the yeti myth, confused at what he saw, he wanted an answer. So he began making trips. To Tibet. Sikkim. Nepal. Unfortunately for Messner's reputation, word leaked. At a press conference commemorating his successful ascent of Makalu, his final 8000-meter peak, which by all regards should have been the subject of the hour, the headline that would carry was not his mountaineering achievement. It was that Reinhold Messner saw a yeti! One Indian journalist heard about it beforehand, and made sure to bring it up at the press conference, causing quite the ruckus. What really set it off: in an instinctually truthful response, Messner admitted he had seen one. The bulbs flashed, the questions flew...and his reputation suffered. 

Messner went on more trips. He wanted an answer. Justification. Vindication. And he found the answer he was looking for. He does have a very plausible explanation. And more importantly, through publishing it, has successfully exonerated himself from the Abominable Snowman Stigma. And I for one, a Messner admirer for years, am relieved.

Messner is Italian, and has authored around 50 books. This one, like many books translated from another language, suffers slightly from narrative fluidity. Not much, and it's worth overlooking.

Whether you have an interest in Reinhold Messner as a world-class mountaineer, or if you've never heard of him and need you a yeti fix, get a hold of this.