Rating: 1/5

I want to begin by acknowledging what this book meant to the gay community when it was first published in 1970. This is purportedly the first gay romance to have a happy ending, revolutionary for the time. Thankfully, there’s no shortage of MM romances nowadays. 

I was excited for the first queer romance in our Romance History Project. Unfortunately, there’s no limit to how horribly this aged. It’s is now my most hated romance after The Sheik. It also managed to be more racist than The Sheik. 

It’s the most romancey of the books we’ve read for this project so far in that Peter and Charlie’s feelings for each other and their sexual relationship are the center of the plot but it was also an objectively terrible romance. I hated Charlie and hoped Peter would get away and find someone—anyone—else. It’s unfortunate this was the first positive representation many encountered. They deserved so much better.

Charlie is unredeemable. He never pays any consequences for his actions. (It was troubling to learn Merrick’s books are semi-autobiographical. Charlie is certainly the author’s stand-in. Yikes.) The first time Charlie and Peter are alone is dubcon at best, sexual assault at worst. The dick measuring scene read as predatory. Charlie didn’t at all care about what Peter wanted, much less whether it would bring him pleasure. That doesn’t really change through the arc of their relationship. Charlie’s wants and needs are the only things that matter.

I don’t recommend this book to anyone but I especially urge caution if intimate partner violence, sexual violence, racism, and homophobia are sensitive topics for you. Merrick doesn’t treat anything that Charlie does as a problem. It’s a lot to take and I did my best to be thorough about those CWs. With that in mind, Charlie doesn’t spend time justifying or rationalizing his actions or even thinking much about them at all. He wants to have sex when he wants it, he wants any acting role as his due, and he wants his grandmother CB to continue funding him. He finds Peter attractive so he takes him. He gets irritated by Peter wanting him to embrace being gay so he finds a girl to hook up with to “prove” he’s not gay and then sexually assaults her when she doesn’t move fast enough for him. He wants to fit in the parameters of the life his grandmother has set before him so he violently breaks up with Peter and immediately hooks up with Hattie, impulsively deciding to marry her the next day. When the marriage doesn’t go well (shock!), he rapes her. This is only scratching the surface.

While there’s much that needs to be unpacked (cock biting incident, anyone?), I’m only going to focus on the worst of the racism as I haven’t really seen it covered in reviews and the degree completely took me aback. This is a spoiler and I have tagged it as such in the content notes but I’m not going to hide it here because it needs to be called out. Charlie and Peter are overtly racist, although Peter initially pushes back on some of Charlie’s ideas and is more open to having relationships with Black people. But CB’s beliefs surpass theirs and are truly abhorrent. That is well before she finally reveals her father was secretly Black. She did not find this information out until she was already pregnant or she would not have had children. She believes in blood purity and white supremacy: she did not want her daughter to have children but she did so she is adamant that Charlie not have children so their blood won’t spread. Not only is this horrific, CB reveals this secret while forcing Charlie’s hands on her breasts during an argument. I have no idea what Merrick was thinking or what purpose this reveal could possibly serve. It was deeply upsetting to read.

Problematic aspects aside, the writing style didn’t work for me either. It’s very simplistic in style, which does the extremely instalove, extremely toxic relationship no favors. Not to mention the baked-in misogyny on top of everything else. It was a miserable reading experience from beginning to end. Merrick places great emphasis on Charlie having a large penis. It’s brought up repeatedly. With the revelation at the end that Charlie’s great-grandfather was Black, it raises the question of the stereotype and fetishization of Black men. The author also upholds beauty ideals that plague MM romance to this day.

It would be helpful to know more about this book’s impact. Who was the intended audience? It seemed like it was marketed toward white housewives, instead of those with lived experience. Did it directly lead to the publication of more MM romance? Who were Merrick’s contemporaries? I did learn he was friends with EM Forster and even read the manuscript of Maurice, although that was not published until a year after this, after Forster had died. (We’re reading that next for our project.) While this book is lauded on some lists as an important first, it was hard to find much by way of critique or even engagement with the text. Perhaps it’s widely known just how problematic this book is and no one in academic circles wants to touch it. The podcast Unsung History and the article The World Won’t Mind: The Accidental Success of Gordon Merrick provided relevant context about the author but not much by way of critique.

Characters: Charlie is a 21 year old gay white -passing/biracial (turns out his maternal great-grandfather was Black and this was a family secret) publishing clerk, artist, and aspiring actor. Peter is a 19 year old gay white college student. This begins during the summer of 1939 in Rumson, NJ and NYC. 

Content notes: sexual assault by MC Charlie grabs Peter’s penis without consent, all under the guise of “measuring” it during their first interaction alone. It’s very aggressive seduction and Peter is completely naive to all things sex. Charlie tries to put a date’s hand on his penis without her consent. Charlie later anally rapes his wife., incest/sexual assault CB (Charlie’s grandmother) forces his hands on her breasts during an argument., intimate partner violence Charlie hits and kicks Peter while breaking up with him. Hattie bites Charlie’s penis and clamps down it; Charlie violently assaults her, at first to get her to stop biting him but then continues punching her, to the point where he thinks he killed her. She survived and they never see each other again. Tim hits Peter when Peter breaks up with him to go back to Charlie., infidelity Charlie is hooking up with Peter and Peter believes they’re monogamous when Charlie kisses a girl and tries to force her to give him a handjob. Charlie and Peter get back together while Peter is dating someone else and Charlie is still married., rape apologism and sexual assault cover up, workplace sexual harassment director tries to get Charlie to sleep with him for a role, sexual coercion, alcohol abuse, homophobia, internalized homophobia, homophobic slurs, homophobic violence, racism, internalized racism CB reveals her father was secretly Black. She did not find this out until adulthood when she was pregnant. She has repugnant views of Black people., racial slurs (including the N-word), blood purity Charlie’s grandmother found out her father was Black while she was already pregnant or she would not have had children. She did not want daughter to have children and is adamant that Charlie should not have children so their blood won’t spread., misogyny, sexual shaming (Charlie tells his wife she’s frigid), slut-shaming, ableism, mental illness stigma, homosexuality conflated as mental illness, toxic grandmother, grandmother murdered her husband (past), Charlie’s grandfather was a physically abusive alcoholic, family planning discussion, unsafe sex practices (condomless sex with Hattie without prior discussion of STI or pregnancy prevention; she’s on birth control), on page sex, road head, biting, masturbation, alcohol, inebriation, hangover, marijuana, cigarettes, gender essentialism, ableist language, gendered pejoratives, hyperbolic language around suicide, mentions of people who died by suicide during the Depression, mention of suicidal ideation, war reference

*Buddy read with Charlotte, Hannah, and Vicky.