Rating: 3/5

The man who “uses a camera as a device that resembles a vagina pretending to be a penis”.

It is almost impossible to judge the merit of this collection as the digital versions online are disgracefully blurred (you reprehensible weeb japanophiles ought to rectify this), but the premise of the book itself is as blurred as the image quality of the smut I’ve been self-consciously attempting to view for the last hour or so. I’ve been sitting here having an internal monologue along similar lines to the amateur aesthete who wanders into a gallery and asks the age old question - “Just how long am I supposed to be looking at this thing for?”

I mean, at the end of the day, aren’t these just a compilation of tits and furry bushes from the 80s? Does Taschen’s publishing and explicit seal of approval elevate this material? Am I suddenly not a pervert because I have a Doctor Evil-esque pinky finger at the corner of my mouth whilst looking at these obscene images? My main attraction (after getting it recommended to me after trying to buy Undercover Surrealism: Georges Bataille and Documents on eBay) is that this is a cultural artefact akin to Krafft-Ebbing’s Psychopathia Sexualis or Havelock Ellis’ Psychology of Sex - it lists ingenuous methods of eroticism, with: literal glass ceilings with knicker-less women above, men dressed as babies getting blowjobs, good old-fashioned rusty trombones, public group sex (in many of these the question ought to be asked - do too many fingers spoil the broth?), endless vaginal and penile douches, men in coffins which have gloryholes, topless Japanese Nazis and crucified women, orgone machines, cock and ball torture techniques I can’t even begin to wrap my head around, etc. etc.

The closest analogue to Nobuyoshi that immediately comes to mind is Gaspar Noe’s self-inclusion of himself masturbating in the gay club during the opening scene of Irreversible, as Nobuyoshi never attempts to extricate himself from the debauchery as some disinterested spectator, he is more than willing to rock ‘n’ roll and quite literally get his hands dirty.

Unlike Ellis or Krafft-Ebbing however this is ultra specific, detailing a seedy scene of Japan over the course of only two or so years. Tokyo Lucky Hole can perhaps be viewed as a pretty decent vindication of a certain kind of sex industry, one which is populated by enthusiastic amateurs rather than economically-marginalised, often trafficked, desperate women - it seems, as it’s portrayed in these photos at the very least, as an innocent kind of “ideal”, uncoercive and joyful. But I have to admit, for me at least, this never really transcends the confines of being a catalogue, a snapshot, and something which will be rather swiftly forgotten. Maybe I’m wrong, maybe I’m right…. maybe I’m just somebody who likes having a look at naked women (I really ought to be ashamed of posting this.)