Rating: 4/5

This psychological murder mystery is, in my opinion, one of Walters’ best. And I have read lots of her work.

 

The plot is about a woman determined to solve what she believes to be the murder of a neighbour and friend. 

 

The book starts with ‘I could never decide whether ‘Mad Annie’ was murdered because she was mad or because she was black.’ And while her killing may be resolved, this question remains a source of vexation throughout.

 

In the telling of a really good story, this book raises issues of racism, the acceptance (or lack thereof) of the mentally ill and socially snobbery. Classism and the lack of ability of the working class (in England in this instance) to accept those they consider beneath them are central themes to this book too. In addition, the question of revenge as opposed to justice runs through the narrative too. 

 

While the book is set in England in the 70s and in the late 90s, the issues raised are very pertinent to current day South Africa. We have a rapidly growing middle class who seem unable to get over their poor roots; we have racism hidden all over the place in all directions; we have poverty rendering people unable to get the help they need; and we a police force many of us do not trust.

 

But do not think this book is just about issues and deep stuff. It is also a wonderfully readable story in which a killing is unraveled and a mystery solved. The multi-format structure of the book makes it easy to read too; it moves from straight text, through emails and memos to personal letters. Various points of view are thus included, making the story rich and well rounded.

 

Be warned though, the last page of the book had me in tears. I sat in bed, weeping for the deep deep sadness of it all. But don’t read the last page first. It would not make you cry unless you had read the whole story. And if you read the last page and then read the story, much of the story will be wasted. 

 

If you like mystery and well written yarn, then this book should be on your holiday reading list for this December.

 

Strongly recommended and worth actually buying, especially if you can pass it on to another mystery story lover.