Rating: 4/5

Having read this decades ago, I remembered all of it. It's the perfect length for this story.

It's more than just the usual current modern "coming of age" woman's tale (as if having sex and being adult in work or school decisions even approaches true adulthood LOL!) but much more. It's a full coming into her own will and identity as a self-directed person. And its context is also perfection for the majority of women's lives during the first 3/4ths of the last century. And not just in England, either. Remember, it's not just class distinctions but the fact that women in large percentages never worked outside the home or were far from sphere of family influences, and the young mothers of Virginia's class- never. Readers posting here upon this novella really did make me laugh. Their reactions! Influences of norm and society- and behaviors to fit that were necessary. They really don't grasp it. 

Some note it is not the best of her novellas. I rather disagree. Pilcher even broaches the conflict with the minimal of unkindness (the cutting with Nanny)in language and with prose and manners excellence. Her disagreements are HUGE but do not carry backward looking victim resentments. What a psychology! Deciding that a victim self-classification is perpetually self-defeating is just a cornerstone of her life message that continually feels like a pair of strong arms around the vulnerable. No one does conflict resolution better than Pilcher. The kind that accomplishes real change and yet without nasty acrimonious offensive or defensive postures. Nor lingering ire of aftermath.

Here the romance is entirely second. People "fit" is first. And the way to grow up to understand how important the mix of now is to both. 

I'm glad I reread this. Last time I didn't have the window to realize the crux of this book. Eustace telling her the truth after re-meeting 10 years later. How the ones who love you the most (and have your real best future and not just your good will in mind) if they DO care for you- will then and often tell you the truth that you don't want to hear.