Rating: 3/5

Robot Stories: Old and New 
2 June 2019

	I should point out that I read less than half of this book, but that was because most of the stories that were contained therein were also contained in some of his other collections, such as the two robot collections that I only just read. However, as is obvious from the above sentence, there were also stories in here that weren’t included (and Asimov cheekily blames his publisher for that, namely because it would encourage more sales due to the fact that there were some unpublished stories therein).

	Interestingly, a lot of these unpublished stories (or I should say stories that weren’t published in I, Robot and Rest of the Robots because there were written in his second iteration of science-fiction writing. The thing was that Asimov pretty much wrote about anything and everything, and after he was exhausted from his fiction writing he decided to go and start writing non-fiction, and apparently there is very little that he didn’t actually write about – that is what really impresses me about the guy. Hey, he even wrote two volumes on the Bible.

	So, the problem lies in the fact that his second iteration of stories, well, weren’t as good as the first. That doesn’t mean that they were bad, it just means that they where, well, just not as good. Still, many of them were quite enjoyable to read, and he even has an Elijah Bailey and Daneel story included, which his fans all wanted him to write, and were somewhat disappointed because, well, they wanted him to actually write a novel, not a short story.

	The book though is quite interesting in how the stories are laid out, and finishes with Bicentennial Man, a story of a robot’s desire to become human. In fact, as we move through the book the common theme seems to be the movement of robots going from machines to pretty much becoming indistinguishable from humans. Of course there is one problem, and that they are functionally immortal – it does not matter how many parts of a human body is replaced, the fact that one cannot prevent the death of brain cells (as Asimov suggests) is one of the conclusions that is reached as to why humans and robots differ, and why humans are quite resistant to robots becoming more humanlike.

	There are a number of interesting stories though, and all of them seem to be thought experiments around the idea of robots, and the concept of the three laws. For instance, there is one story where prosthetics get to a point where the question is then raised as to whether we are dealing with a human or an artificial construction, and as such where is the line between a robot and a human drawn. This question is explored much further in Bicentennial Man, which is quite interesting itself, especially since the robot is definitely playing a long game.

	Another idea that is explored is the limits of the second law, but then as another reviewer points out, Asimov creates these laws, and then goes to the absolute extremes to test their limits. For instance, what if two humans give orders to a robot that conflict with each other – which human does the robot obey, and how does the robot determine which human to obey? Does the robot then need to determine whether the humans are of sound mind and body, and if not, does the robot then escape the second law?

	As I said, the book was actually quite good, and rather enjoyable, though the problem is that a lot of Asimov’s later writings have sort of lost the spark that a lot of his earlier writings have. The problem is though that a lot of the stories are reprints, so you might find yourself skipping over quite a few that you have already read, only to get to the ones that you have yet to read.