Rating: 5/5

I remember now why I decided (after A Song for Summer) why I should give some time before I take next book of Eva Ibbotson. Again, on the one hand I am enchanted and I want to read more of her stories, on the other hand I feel that I must recover after this one.

Here we have a vanishing world of Austrian culture which for long time (until world wars) was one of the highest in the world. Who from West Europe or USA remembers / knows today how important Vienna was? If you don't know you can start to learn with this novel.

Eva Ibbotson was born in Vienna in 1925. When Hitler came into power, Ibbotson's family moved to England. She knew what she was writing about. Furthermore, you feel it that it was her world once and that she long for it. I love her Vienna and all her characters. I would want to now them in the real life. (I should probably add that most of the book took place in England, but Vienna is always in the air and in hearts)

Ibbotson had intended to be a physiologist, but was put off by the amount of animal testing that she would have to do. She loved nature. It isn't some cliche. She really did. You can see it clearly in this novel and more deeply in A Song for Summer. The nature, its beauty and eternity flowed through the pages.

  "How could there be so much light, so much movement; how could everything be so terribly there (...) And the air moved too - how it moved! You didn't need to breathe, it breathed itself" (...) I didn't know, she thought. I didn't imagine that anything could be like this, could make one feel so… purged… so clean… so alone and unimportant and yet so totally oneself

Likewise the music. It also flowed through the book. Nature and music were a great love of Ibbotson.

I can't stop thinking about all these people who had to leave their homes, their lives and move to the foreign country. I know, in comparison to others who were less fortunate, they at least lived. Still... But we know what war does to people who doesn't start it and doesn't want it at all.

Although the historical background and some personal tragedies in the book are sad it isn't a sad book. There is a happy ending, all main characters survived the war. There is humor, you will smile some times and you will feel many times a warm touch in your heart.

  "Would you like me to stop talking? Because I can. I have to concentrate, but it's possible"
 ;-) 

I think, no, I am sure that Eve Ibbotson was a very wise woman with a good heart and a deep understanding of human nature. Her books (those classified as for young-adult) have something from fairy tales. Her storytelling is original, beautiful, enchanting. It would grip your heart and to the end would not let go. I think that one must read her book to understand it. I can't compare Ibbotson to someone else.

And as I said, she had very important things to tell us. For example:

  One must not judge other cultures by the standards of one's own

  He meant that the dead must be allowed to move about freely inside us, they musn't be encapsulated, made finite by their prejudices

Pilly said about Ruth: "She made life… big for me" I can tell the same about this book and their characters. And perhaps each of one will find some day his own Willow Tea Rooms. I would like it very, very much.

PS If you love a sweet, true love story you will like it. If you love nature you will like it. If you love music (classic music) you will like it. If you love stories about families, relationships which are so strong that would endure everything you will like it. If you believe in the good in people you will like it. If you love science, especially paleontology you will like it. There are many, many more reasons why you will like this book.

And when you read it and fall in love you can pick A Song for Summer.