Rating: 4/5

“The Curse of the Mummy’s Tomb” is the first Goosebumps book I have ever read. Ever. I’ll let that statement sink in for a few minutes.

I know what you are thinking: How could you have not read even one of the most popular kids’ horror book series in publishing history? One that is, since the first published book in the series back in 1992, still going and still immensely popular?

I dunno. Seriously. I don’t know how I’ve managed to miss this series. One of those weird little things in life. It’s like that one guy I know who has never seen a Star Wars movie. It’s bewildering, I know.

But, I’ve done it. I’ve read my first, and it wasn’t bad. In fact, it was kind of fun. I suppose if I was in middle school, it would be awesome.

I have no idea where this book fits in the series. I think it’s, like, the fifth or the seventh. Not that it matters. They all kind of stand alone, without having to necessarily read them in order.

In “TCotMT”, Gabe is on a vacation with his parents in Egypt. Gabe’s an Egyptian-American, so he has family that live in the country. One of those relatives is his Uncle Ben, an archaeologist who works at the famous Pyramids. He’s excited when he gets to spend a day working on a dig with his uncle, exploring the many tunnels within and under the Great Pyramids. Not so exciting is having to spend the day with his annoying older cousin, Sari. The two inadvertently stumble upon a mystery when one of the workers tries to kidnap them. They escape from this man, Ahmed, but end up lost in a tunnel that lands them in a room full of hundreds of mummies. And they’re all coming to life!

The 1999 movie "The Mummy" has nothing to do with this book. I just thought this movie poster was awesome...

Seriously, if I was in the target demographic—-ages 9-14—-this book would actually be pretty spooky. As someone considerably older, it was still kind of spooky, although certainly tamer than what I look for in a horror novel.

Still, I liked it enough to want to read more Goosebumps. My daughter, who is 8, refuses to read them, as they “look too scary”. That’s fine. I’ll try to convince her in a few more years…