Rating: 3/5

My wife bought this for Celyn and I read it to her.

There are plenty of good things to say about the book. It has a moderate supply of Terry Pratchett's trademark wit for starters. The nomes (gnomes if you like) are an interesting mix of clever and stupid, and the addition of a lost history and their origin in the stars gives a refreshing sci-fi twist to a fantasy-in-the-real-world story. I wonder why that appeals to me...

I'm not sure what age range this is aimed at, but it's published by Corgi Children's and I'm pretty sure my wife would have picked it up in the 11 year old (or less) section. A large part of the humour is too old for 11 year olds, I suspect. I doubt many 11 year olds today know what a haberdashery department is, or even perhaps an iron mongery or stationery department, so when these words are slightly altered and used as tribal names ... most will only hear the whooshing sound as it goes over their heads. So it goes with many of the jokes.

Even so, it's an inventive story with various challenges facing our nomes, not least the understanding of the human world. When the outside nomes meet the store nomes and try to convince them there really is an outside a subtle satire on world views plays out whilst other more concrete problems are overcome.

What was lacking for me, and why this fell shy of 4* was the characters. Pratchett normally delivers strong and interesting characters. Here though, perhaps overwhelmed by the world-building and all the opportunities for fun, Pratchett really doesn't do the job. The single nome we follow through the story does learn a lesson or two about leadership but there isn't any real emotional core or heart to the story. I never cared about the nomes. They could all have been eaten by badgers and I wouldn't have batted an eyelid. 

This was quite an early effort by Sir Terry and he definitely improved with age. Even so, there's enough magic (of the literary kind) here to mean I don't count the money wasted.

I liked the book, 3*. I didn't *really* like it, 4*, or think it amazing 5*.

 
 Join my Patreon
 Join my 3-emails-a-year newsletter #prizes

...