Rating: 5/5

"Maybe there aren't any such things as good friends or bad friends - maybe there are just friends, people who stand by you when you're hurt and who help you feel not so lonely. Maybe they're always worth being scared for, and hoping for, and living for. Maybe worth dying for too, if that's what has to be. No good friends. No bad friends. Only people you want, need to be with; people who build their houses in your heart."

I first came across IT more than two decades ago, just a few years older than the Losers Club kids, and have reread it several times since, and it’s never lost its magic, no matter how old I am or where in life I am. To me, a Constant Reader of Uncle Stevie’s prodigious literary output, it’s quintessential King, King at his best. 

It’s not perfect - and yet it is. Yes, it may be overlong, and at times really feels drug-fueled, and has a few scenes that really should have been cut out at some point — but it’s still King at his absolute best, and he excels at his trademark themes. A town, haunted by its monsters - both human and very much not so - and with enough skeletons in the closet to fill a boneyard. The mundane becoming truly unsettlingly frightening - not in the startling way that slasher stories depend on, but that bone-deep uncomfortable dread that hits slower and always below the belt. The nostalgia for childhood and that unbelievable magic of it — but nothing for the murky ugly time that childhood was set in.
 

“And almost idly, in a kind of side-thought, Eddie discovered one of his childhood’s great truths. Grownups are the real monsters, he thought.”

——— 
“We lie best when we lie to ourselves.” 

And despite the terrifying not-quite clown Pennywise and that paper boat and “we all float down here” red balloon that are familiar to most people through the magic of cultural osmosis, it’s not what I remember the most. No, it’s the incredible intensity of those childhood friendship bonds that connect the Losers Club, the bonds that stretch so deep, the colors and clarity of childhood — the time not of rainbows and butterflies but of becoming a true person, a real “you”, of realization that magic exists and monsters are real and hopefully they can be beaten, and that the world has teeth and is not afraid to bite, but hopefully you are not alone standing against it. So intense of a time when you are both helpless and often powerless and yet incredibly resilient. Because we all know - 
   “[…] What can be done when you’re eleven can often never be done again.”

  “And maybe, Richie thought, that's the scary part. How you didn't stop being a kid all at once, with a big explosive bang, like one of that clown's trick balloons. The kid in you just leaked out, like the air of a tire.”
  

  

  

This book is about the end of childhood — but not quite the loss of innocence (as books like this can often be) — because that’s already been lost, been slowly chipped away by the human monsters - abuse, bullying, neglect, prejudice, and casual cruelty. But in every ending there’s a beginning of something new, and the forces you withstood at eleven may be coming at you again when you’re forty, and it’s your childhood and your friends and belief in them that may just carry you through.

   “[…] It occurred to him that kids were better at almost dying, and they were also better at incorporating the inexplicable into their lives. They believed implicitly in the invisible world. Miracles both bright and dark were to be taken into consideration, oh yes, most certainly, but they by no means stopped the world. A sudden upheaval of beauty or terror at ten did not preclude an extra cheesedog or two for lunch at noon.

But when you grew up, all that changed. You no longer lay awake in your bed, sure something was crouching in the closet or scratching at the window ... but when something did happen, something beyond rational explanation, the circuits overloaded. The axons and dendrites got hot. You started to jitter and jive, you started to shake rattle and roll, your imagination started to hop and bop and do the funky chicken all over your nerves. You couldn’t just incorporate what had happened into your life experience. It didn’t digest. Your mind kept coming back to it, pawing it lightly like a kitten with a ball of string ... until eventually, of course, you either went crazy or got to a place where it was impossible for you to function.”

 

Welcome to the Losers Club. 

5 stars. 

  “I loved you guys, you know.
I loved you so much.”
—————
—————
“Or so Bill Denbrough sometimes thinks on those early mornings after dreaming, when he almost remembers his childhood, and the friends with whom he shared it.”

——————

Also posted on my blog.

——————
2022: Buddy read with Dennis.