Rating: 3/5

Yay, it's my first Dirk Pitt book! I wish Nancy Drew had the budget that this guy has. Huge ships, fancy antique cars, an army of evil, ridiculously wealthy Nazis...

I mean, the Nazis are NOT on the side of our hero, Mary Sue, (cough cough,) ahem, Pitt! Dirk Pitt. Hey, has anyone ever mentioned that the hero's name in this book series is Dirk Pitt???

And honestly, Pitt is not the Mary Sue. The author gives his own name to a character, nicknamed "Dad" Cussler, who is living in the Antarctic and just so happens to be refurbishing a giant 60 year old war machine that might come in handy when Dirk and his friend Al need to save the world from total destruction. But it's NO BIG DEAL or anything. And in real life, the author of the book Cussler founded a NUMA company that explores shipwrecks and donates the findings to museums.

And in this particular book, we see a lady scientist, named Pat O'Connell, who deciphers ancient texts and gets kidnapped by the Nazis, and therefore must be rescued by Dirk and Al. I need to question the editor's allowance to give a female supporting character a name that's too similar to our hero. 

"Blah blah blah," said Pitt.
"Blah blah blah?" replied Pat.

Pitt. Pat. Pitt. Pat.

At one point, during a probable typo, we see Pitt doing a curtsy and a smile, which I'm thinking was probably meant for Pat to do, since there is a lot of sexist nonsense in this book, and in the series as a whole, I'm certain.

I was amused by the loving details that are spread onto every description of a car, or gun, or piece of technology. Author also likes to thoroughly describe what characters are wearing, be it khakis, or scuba gear, or large coats. . . He seems to really think it's special when women wear the color "Taupe." And he thinks it's super-snazzy when a set of identical quintuplet women, adult women, choose to wear matching ball gowns that look identical except for color. He's under the impression that all the other women in the room are supposed to "envy" these walking dolls. In reality, it's a freak show. And it's a little horrifying. It is 100 percent a super villain move to churn out dozens of perfect humans who conduct themselves like clones.

Nonetheless, I guess it was nice to stop by and take a trip through this powerful, wealthy, "Man's world" here. It feels safe to roll my eyes at the bad jokes, and at the inept bad guys who say things like "You clowns are going nowhere!" It was grand to take a trip around the world, and outwit death multiple times.

But yeah, I wish Nancy Drew could have been here.