Rating: 4/5

It's been labelled Country Noir but in reality Daniel Woodrell writes mouth watering literature in a noir mileau with a touch of the Thompson/Cain existentialism.

Set in a small Ozark town, a setting familiar to you if you've already discovered the wonder that is Daniel Woodrell, Tomato Red is the story of Sammy, Bev, Jam and Jay; how they come together and how they dissipate, how they live and how they dream.

Woodrell sets the scene with great effect from the off, filling your mind with descriptive passages that you could only dream about writing yourself. Interlacing the horror with the humour in this Ozark reality from the point of view of Sammy, a lonely man who has turned to crank and house breaking in an attempt to win friends and influence people, you are taken on a whirlwind journey that would not be out of place in a novel from John Steinbeck. And that is the real talent of Woodrell's early novel, disguising his important literary work in an easily accessible genre framework.

The four main characters are all interesting and very well written, their differing approach towards life captured in the (what I can only assume to be) perfect and honest manner of their speach and behaviour. These are real people whose weaknesses and faults are painted in burned out neon but you can't help but feel affection towards them, the way they accept their failings and make them work for their own benefit.

If you want an action packed plot, or even an acknowledged story arc you're probably best to stay away from this one. The narrative meanders around, letting you get to know the town and the people, watches relationships develop until you feel as though you too are a resident of Venus Holler and then it ends. These are my favourite kind of stories, ones without an obvious once upon a time beginning or the definitive closure that has come to be expected in Western fiction; this is a slice of Ozark life, it existed before you arrived and it will keep going long after you close the book for the final time.