Rating: 4/5

The Druid of Shannara focuses on Walker Boh this time. We didn't really get to know him very well in the first book in this series and I wasn't sure I wanted to read an entire novel that centered around him as the main character. Then when he lost his arm, I wasn't sure how this story was all going to turn it or if I was going to end up like Walked Boh any more than I did at the beginning of the tale. How can he be a druid with only one arm? But, in the end, I found that I did enjoy reading about him and getting to know him better.

As for the assassin Pe Ell, at first I couldn't stand him. After all, he's an assassin, right? You're not supposed to like him. As the story progresses, you do warm up to him a little bit, but not much. After all, are you really going to like someone that is determined to kill everyone in Walker Boh's party, especially the beautiful Quickening? I think not! Then there is Quickening. I really liked her but found that she didn't quite grow in the direction I thought she would. The other main character is the old man, Dees. I really liked him. He's an awesome character.

Terry Brooks does a wonderful job bringing us another fantasy tale in the world of Shannara. I'm sure that he has always regretting killing off Allanon in The Sword of Shannara, the first book he ever wrote in this world. I always thought it was a mistake. After all, the author uses the druid's shade all the time on other books. I liked that this story involve the resurrection of Paranor, the Druid's Keep. I have always been excited about the prospect of having new druids in Shannara. So, I was rooting for Walker Boh to be successful in his quest.

As for the story itself, it is another exciting quest that kept me wanting more. The Stone King, although not evil, is misguided. He is a great opponent for Walker Boh and I thoroughly enjoyed the adventure of crossing the Charnal Mountains and entering the stony land beyond.

Overall, The Druid of Shannara is a great fantasy tale and a wonderful addition to the ever-growing Shannara series. Terry Brooks is my favorite author and I always enjoy being swept back into the world of Shannara. I recommend this book if you are a lover of fantasy, but really do recommend starting from the beginning of the series.

I rated this book an 8 out of 10.