Rating: 4/5

***Just had to update my review because I have now put the information in this book into practice and am absolutely astounded at the results! It is a miracle and truly more valuable to me than gold. It feels good to feel so good and to have the energy and ability to function day after day after day from morning to evening. I had made the sole and had it sitting in my house for four years and had no idea what a treasure I had. Could have saved me a whole lot of grief and lost opportunities if I had taken it way back then. But then it is not me to blindly try something just from a recommendation ... I need to know and I need to understand the why. I was soo far gone by that time that reading was not something I could do much of. This book coupled with hard experience and other things I have learned on the journey came together in one big aha! It was a major piece of the puzzle. How wonderful to have such a kind creator who left us with an abundance of what we need in the earth! So simple, so abundant, so affordable, so doable. I am truly grateful. Read the book and find out for yourself or if you don't have the time or ability, give the sole a try anyway so that you don't miss out on life and precious years with your family and community like I did. The sole is for everyone, healthy or ill, depressed or anxious, overwhelmed or fatigued, arthritis, diabetes and on and on ... I believe this will help. It is one of the essentials in life. Plain and simple.
 

Parts of this book are right down fascinating! I appreciated this book more now than I would have in the past simply because it reconfirmed some things that I have already discovered both in other areas of study and from my own experience. While the jury is still out on parts of the book, I did gain much from it. 

The best part of the book was the discussion of salt. The value of and need for salt, natural salt in particular (as opposed to sodium chloride in the form of table salt), is grossly underestimated and misunderstood by mainstream America and it is wreaking havoc among us. Crazy how we can complicate things so much so easily. How reassuring it is to know that something as simple as crystal salt can make such a difference in your health and wellbeing. It already has in mine, but I have experienced the extreme lack of salt as my body simply cannot hold onto it or get adequate amounts with problematic adrenal glands. Having adequate salt makes all the difference in my ability to think or function - (and because of this book I have a greater understanding of why that is!) Crystal salt contains all of the minerals and trace elements that our body is made up of and historically was more precious than gold and used as a form of payment. Salt can balance an energy deficit. Don't miss out on understanding the importance of this vital nutrient whether you read it from this book or saltinstitute.org or both. My life is about to get even more simple because of what I now know and understand.

Now, don't get me wrong, the discussion on water was great too teaching me more than I could have imagined about water.