Rating: 1/5

I have to admit that I thought this was a complete flop. I LOVED this book up until the last chapters. It completely fell through. These people spend the entire book running running running from the crazed cult people who are trying to kill a little boy because the cult leader, mother grace, thinks he is the anti Christ. They burn down their houses, kill their dog, and all the people around them as well. 
Finally once they think they have found a safe place atop a mountain in the freezing cold amongst blizzards, they still somehow find them and end up shooting their body guard they hired when the police wouldn't help them that has also fallen in love with the boys mother. He doesn't die though, and as they're running through the woods and wilderness in said blizzards the bad guys are some how always close by. They just about die and freeze to death before they make it some caves, the boys mom spends a ridiculous amount of time looking through the caves and even takes notice of the rock formations and Indian art work, all while her son, new dog and boyfriend set outside freezing to death. They finally makes camp inside a perfect enough cave. After a light snooze the crazy people find them yet again and there's a small battle in which the mom is also shot in the leg and can do nothing from almost have her kid killed. 
The giant brute at the end seemingly kills their new dog as well by bashing him on the head with his gun and it looks like no matter what they will all die in this cave, but ol Kyle the ugly giant finally finds his heart and decides that he's through with killing. Once mother Grace realizes she will have too act alone she lets off a few pathetic shots from the gun only to be attacked by a cloud of bats and killed. Kyle goes for help and it seems that the little boy Joey can also heal people. The adults take notice that dog jumps up without even being dizzy even though he had blood caked to his ears and once the little boy comes to see if their body guard is ok, he passes out and comes to feeling so much better then he did, even though by now he must have dame near bled to death. They're rescued, but all the events in the cave cast doubt in the mothers and body guards minds... Even after all this time of running for their lives to save a boy they know to not be the anti Christ they suddenly get so much doubt in their heads that they have to go and dig up the old dead dog to see if the look a like new dog isn't the dead one brought back from the dead! Once he digs it up he figures the Irish setter that's in the grave of the dead golden retriever is just a mistake by the pet undertaker guys and lets it go without another thought. 
The books ends with the happy couple getting married and moving on, not making any mention of how they got off the hook of killing 8 people or what happened with the rest of the cult. 
I'm sorry, but it lost me.