Rating: 2/5

It's a sterile story that feels in some ways like an autobiography full of half-interesting anecdotes but nothing gripping. The cover of my paperback edition features the phrase "master of the unexpected". The only thing "unexpected" was how such a successful author shifted SO many copies of such mediocrity.

As for the characters, WITHOUT spoilers, there's one character whose identity provides a plot twist which genuinely surprised me though it only arrives in the final few pages. Everyone else I found predictable to stereotypical levels. The main character is interesting on the basis that the author's intentions for her remain unknown to me. Mary Ashley is a character of great power who never feels completely in control of proceedings. If that was the point, then fair play, but if Sheldon tried to sell a strong character who should lead the story and be a hero, then it failed. It's not often that a main character feels like an out-of-their-depth substitute teacher who gets to the end more through luck than judgment. (Excuse the pun because the character is a successful teacher in actual fact!) The author resorts to; "this protagonist is great because I say so." There is no real threat of danger. I LIKE Mary Ashley as a character but I was constantly waiting for her big moment to shine but unfortunately that never really arrives.

Credit where it's due, Sheldon is an excellent researcher. His knowledge of political systems in eastern Europe and the US is first class, spoken as if by someone with vast experience in the diplomatic field. It feels authentically structured but all too often it reaches in to nonsense, whether that's characters suddenly doing/saying something that contradicts the rest of their personality. Or whether it's that odd passage towards the end when someone steps forward like in Scooby-Doo and explains the whole plot like it's all obvious. Or even whether Sheldon, a male author, undercuts a noble sentiment about Mary's ability with a subtle, mildly chauvinistic dig. The latter however was so slight that it probably should just be a sign of the times, after all this novel is more than 30 years old and written by a man born in 1917.

This book probably makes more sense if it's read for a second time, but there isn't enough plot density, character development or twists to make me want to do that. A good way to pass the time, but little more than that.