Rating: 4/5

First of all, I thought this book was great. Bird is unflinchingly honest (to the point where she actually made me mad a couple of times), and she was not shy about sharing her opinions as well as every detail, no matter how embarrassing, of her excursions. My biggest disagreement with her was her belief that Estes Park was the most beautiful and superior place in Colorado and all other natural sites were inferior, and in some cases, “hideous”. I have a really hard time thinking of any natural area in the state as “hideous”. My biggest surprise came when she dismissed Garden of the Gods completely, saying something along the lines of ‘if I were a divinity...I would not choose to reside there’. Garden of the Gods is one of my favorite things about living here. I go at least 2-3 times a month. 

	Despite her use of strong adjectives, both in the positive, but mostly in the negative (hideous, repulsive, etc.), I really enjoyed this read. When I started out, I expected a very isolated, and extremely dangerous existence for Bird in the “wild west,” but what I found was quite a bit different. The story was not just about the natural beauty that she encountered along the way and the hardships she faced, but there were also portraits of the people she met, some with very famous names, and some extremely detailed and lifelike. Today, one would expect someone embarking on a journey like this to have the luxury of camping equipment or even hotel stays, but the fact that settlers would open their doors to strangers traveling through and give them room and board surprised me. It was not in keeping with the idea I had in my mind of life in the Colorado Territory in the 1870s. I was very interested in her relationship with Jim and her characterization of him as an extremely dark man and a drunk, but also one of her closest companions, and a handsome English gentleman, at that. 

	My other preconceived notion that I had when I first began reading was that Bird would have a really hard time accomplishing her task because she was a woman. It was not that I thought her incapable, but I believed that it would be much more dangerous for her in the “wild west” and that she would be specifically targeted by less than savory characters, many of whom she met along the way. On the contrary, it seemed as though being female was actually to her benefit under most circumstances. She was treated very courteously by those she visited, and was often given shelter, food, or help when she may not have been otherwise. That surprised me, and it gave me a more well-rounded idea of what a journey like this would have been like.