Rating: 4/5

I plucked this short retrospective from the bargain shelves years ago, not knowing very much at all about Roy Lichtenstein, other than an awareness that several of his works were done in the graphic style of 1950's romance comics. My cultural literacy ended there--I knew nothing about his other styles, or even what the point was behind the comic art. But, as I had been a collector of comics from this period, I was more-or-less drawn to Lichtenstein's work, even though now I realize that that connection is not a straight line; perhaps it may be analogous to the relationship between a man who enjoys playing a pick-up game of softball and one who bids tens of thousands of dollars at an auction for vintage baseball cards. Even though they might superficially seem to be dealing with the same subject, they are really separate worlds. That isn't to say that they cannot overlap, just that one does not necessarily lead to the other.

I've noticed that there are several books dealing with Lichtenstein's art--so much so that if I were choosing from what's available online, I'd be overwhelmed. Based on my familiarity with this Taschen book, and after reading through descriptions and reviews of the other available collections, it's apparent that many of these books are meant to fulfill different niches, and the right choice is going to depend on the reader's previous knowledge of Lichtenstein's works, and how one intends to use the book.

Those readers looking for a coffee-table book should stop right here--this is not that. Instead, it is the height of a typical modern hardcover and about one-and-a-half inches wider, with only 96 pages. Given those dimensions, it should be apparent that this book is meant to convey only the broad strokes concerning Lichtenstein's career, although I think the editors have done a nice job of maximizing the amount of artwork shown (including examples from all his styles and periods), with many reproductions in full or three/quarter page layouts. The physical quality of the book (construction, paper and printing quality, and the reproduced colors) are all in keeping with the sort of product that Taschen books are known for, which is to say very well done and worthwhile. On the strength of the artwork alone, readers unfamiliar or only slightly familiar with Lichtenstein's work will probably find this to be a good overview of his work; those who go on to decide that Lichtenstein is an artist they do not care for will have had more than enough examples to form their opinion, and I think even a good portion of those who do enjoy his art will find that here are all the examples of it they'll need.

The accompanying text by Janis Hendrickson seeks to inform readers of a few biographical details, an overview of Lichtenstein's progression as an artist, a chapter exclusively devoted to Ben-Day dots, and chapters concerning Lichtenstein's commentary on other artwork through the medium of his own paintings. Here, I think, the book is weaker, though given the format and length, I can't see how it could be stronger. All in all, Ms. Hendrickson probably strikes a pretty good balance of getting the most information into print, while at the same time getting out of the way and letting the artwork speak for itself.

Of the other retrospectives available, some seem more aimed at teachers and younger students (Whaam! The Art and Life of Roy Lichtenstein) or perhaps even more cursory than this one (Roy Lichtenstein (MoMA Artist Series)), which is about the size of a trade paperback). There is a coloring book (Roy Lichtenstein Coloring Book) if that's a hobby of yours, and several other retrospectives, that, depending on the size of your pocket book, may be of interest (Roy Lichtenstein: A Retrospective), and even a Catalogue raisonné if your pockets are really deep (The Prints of Roy Lichtenstein: A Catalogue Raisonne 1948-1997). This only scratches the surface, but for myself, now that I've read through this Taschen overview, I'd like to read something with a little more depth, and am most interested in the Guggenheim retrospective put out by Dianne Waldman (Roy Lichtenstein).

If you have little previous experience with Lichtenstein's art (as was with me), and are curious, I think this is a great vehicle to satisfy that curiosity. Even if, like me, you decide you'd like to have something more complete, or more in-depth, this Taschen book is inexpensive enough to keep me from feeling guilty if I decide to replace it someday with something larger. A great introduction.