Rating: 4/5

3.5(3.4)/5 ⭐
or 105.5/155

  "Human beings can tolerate an immortal robot, for it doesn’t matter how long a machine lasts. They cannot tolerate an immortal human being, since their own mortality is endurable only so long as it is universal.”

’The Complete Robot’ by Isaac Asimov contains 31 of the 37 short stories he wrote for the ‘Robot Series’, making it the most comprehensive collection available. The stories within include all those from both ‘I, Robot’ (minus the framing story) and ‘The Rest of The Robots’ alongside many more. Written over 3 decades and spanning several hundred “Fictional-world” years, Asimov utilises these pages to explore the famous Three Laws of Robotics, a concept created by the man himself, in great depth. Upon first reading, the Laws seem entirely elementary and uncomplicated:

1.	A robot may not injure a human being or, through inaction, allow a human being to come to harm
2.	A robot must obey the orders given it by human beings except where such orders would conflict with the First Law
3.	A robot must protect its own existence as long as such protection does not conflict with the First or Second Laws

However, upon finishing the collection, one moves forward with a firm foundational knowledge of the incredible complexity that dwells below the surface of these 3 basic principles. Asimov investigates, in his stories, the plethora of problematic scenarios that the development of a robot’s positronic brain presents. Robots are rarely presented as either menace or pathos, but instead are simply coldly logical and very intelligent “beings” with the ability to interpret the 3 laws in a seemingly unlimited variation of (usually unforeseen and unpredicatable) ways, providing many a wt absolute f moment.

  ”Today’s Science Fiction is tomorrow’s Science Fact”.
 If anyone’s work lives up to this saying, it’s Asimov’s. The shear number of prophetic darts this guy threw at the proverbial dart board of probable future events, and hit within close proximity of the bull’s eye, is simply astounding! Even of the events that have not yet come to pass, and possibly will not, there are few that stretch the imagination so far as to make them entirely unbelievable or inconceivable. Asimov’s Sci-Fi is one that is grounded and governed by real science and if/when he pushes the boundaries of possibility, he always has a potentially feasible, even if not highly probable, explanation.

  ”All normal life, Peter, consciously or otherwise, resents domination. If the domination is by an inferior, or by a supposed inferior, the resentment becomes stronger.”

   “Asimov’s writing is too dry”.
 I’ve come across this statement countless times but can confidently say, based purely off his short fiction, that it’s not one I’ll be repeating. I found at times that he was capable of creating tension through great dialogue (‘The Tercentenary Incident’ and ‘Let’s get together’), he was quite funny (‘Victory Unintentional’) and could also tug on the heart strings when the time was right (‘The Bicentennial Man’). I also enjoyed the way in which all of our silly little idiosyncrasies and foolish habits are exposed to the unbiased judgement of Asimov’s Robots when viewed through the lens of their purely logical reasoning.

The collection isn’t perfect. There are a few shorts that didn’t hit the mark for me either because they weren’t substantial or thought-provoking enough. In some cases, most notably in the Susan Calvin stories, there is a great deal of chauvinism and sexist rhetoric amongst the male employees of US Robots, though I will say that Susan is always elevated to a position of superior integrity and unmatched intelligence. Asimov gives her plenty of opportunities to bite back and does she ever! At the end of the day, Calvin’s legacy as US Robot’s greatest, almost mythical status, Robo-psychologist probably shows where Asimov stands on the subject of sexism in his time and perhaps what he includes is just a true representation of his own experiences.

There is also a little bit of inconsistency in the thought processes of different robots. At times they are given a much more liberal license to abstract thought than at other times. This occasionally leads to a bit of confusion regarding interpretation of the Three Laws. There is also the case of Andrew (The Bicentennial Man) saying he is still "not quite human" after he has his robotic body replaced with that of a more human looking android. He states that his movements are still just a little bit too calculated and rigid whereas in a number of the previous stories, based more than a century earlier, there were robots hiding in plain sight disguised as people as high-profile as the President of the U.S. I highly doubt technology went backwards to such a degree.

I really enjoyed this collection of Short Stories and can’t wait to get stuck into the full-length novels in the series. I’m told that Elijah Baley (from the Short-story ‘Mirror-Image’) is the main protagonist and I quite liked the investigative/detective-type setup of that story. Side-note: I think these short stories would be phenomenal as an animated short-film collection in the same vein as Netflix’s ‘Love, Death and Robots’. Just putting it out there.

Below are just some brief synopsis’ and occasional opinions on the various stories with individual ratings. They’re not part of the actual review and were really just personal notes as I progressed through the collection. I've criminally simplified the tales in the interest of brevity so there's likely not much to be gained from reading them. 

  "There is no right to deny freedom to any object with a mind advanced enough to grasp the concept and desire the state.”

PART I: SOME NON-HUMAN ROBOTS
A boy's best friend: 2.5 ⭐
If you could love a robot pet and a "real" pet in equal measure and there's no discernible difference between their affection for you, is the authenticity of their love important?

Sally: 4 ⭐
A frightening preamble to a potential Positronic-motored carpocalypse. Also, kinda reminded me of an episode of 'My Strange Addiction' called 'Sex with my car'.

Someday: 4 ⭐ Asimov's predictions regarding how over-reliance on computers could lead to illiteracy, innumeracy and a general lack of fundamental human skills, prompting a role-reversal in which computers take over all important roles and all but a few humans are reduced to menial labour. A delightfully insidious tone.

PART II: SOME IMMOBILE ROBOTS
Point of View: 3⭐

Think!: 3.5 ⭐
Laser (LEG) telepathy and communicating with computers.

True Love: 2.5 ⭐
A warning on the dangers of misusing purpose-built AI. A real MJ/McCartney 'The girl is mine' type setup.

PART III: SOME METALLIC ROBOTS
Robot AL-76 Goes Astray: 4 ⭐
Robot goes missing in action, chaos ensues. A good dose of humour.

Victory Unintentional: 4.5 ⭐ Three of Earth's finest robots travel to Jupiter to find out all they can about the resident alien race who possess a hilarious superiority complex and present a potential risk to mankind.

Stranger in Paradise: 2 ⭐

Light Verse: 2.5 ⭐
A tale of maladjustment, misunderstanding and murder. A predictable "twist" (if you can call it that) and an abrupt ending.

Segregationist: 3 ⭐
Cyber-prosthetics, selective-immortality, blurring the lines between human and robot.

Robbie: 3.5 ⭐
A heart-warming friendship between a young girl and her robot nurse-maid and some terrible parenting.

PART IV: SOME HUMANOID ROBOTS
Let's Get Together: 4 ⭐
The Cold War with America's inferiority in the "Robotics Race" threatening to break the stalemate. A tale of blame games and espionage.

Mirror Image: 3.5 ⭐
Asimov uses "a game of intellectual chicken" between 2 mathematicians, who both claim to be the founders of a revolutionary new mathematical technique, as a backdrop for a little exposition on the potential for dishonesty through a loophole in the 'Three Laws of Robotics'. A crash-course in robot interrogation.

The Tercentenary Incident: 4 ⭐
A sci-fi mystery set in 2076. An assassination attempt on the President, a cover-up and Question Marks around the laws of robotics. Great, tense dialogue.

PART V: POWELL AND DONOVAN
First Law: 2 ⭐ A tall tale about a robot that breaks the first law.

Runaround: 3 ⭐
On a hot as hell Mercury, Powell and Donovan are in a race against time to break SPD13 (aka Speedy) out of a vicious "drunken" logic cycle created by confusion between and increased 3rd law potential and a decreased 2nd law potential.

Reason: 4.5 ⭐
Sent to Solar Station B.119 5 to commission Robot QT-I (Cutie) and evaluate whether it is able to run the station without further human involvement, D and P quickly find themselves having to try to convince said bot of it's origins and end up in an arm wrestle for command of the station. I'm beginning to feel as though, through cold reasoning alone, some robots are able to bypass the 3 laws or at least produce an undesired result due to an unforeseen interpretation/situational re-prioritisation of the laws.

Catch that Rabbit: 2.5 ⭐

PART VI: SUSAN CALVIN
Liar!: 3 ⭐
Telepathic ability and a very literal interpretation of the First Law combine to give us, Herbie, a people pleasing robot. The first of the Susan Calvin stories and, wow! Hell hath no fury...!

Satisfaction Guaranteed: 3.5 ⭐
A story of transformation as Claire Belmont's feelings for a robot housekeeper prototype go from fear, to acceptance, to admiration, to (dare I say it) lust and ultimately self-disgust (at feeling such a way for an AI). Side note: In this story, Susan Calvin is described as having "the cold, faraway look of someone who has worked with machines so long that a little of the steel had entered her blood". Asimov is drawing quite the picture of Susan!

Lenny: 2.5 ⭐
Susan Calvin takes on the responsibility of teaching Lenny, a robot with a faulty positronic brain, to speak. She suggests that if she were able to teach Lenny new things from scratch (If robots could learn) than in the future, they may be able to produce robots with only primary pathways that could adopt different secondaries when required to do specific jobs making them "as versatile as human beings". Rife with chauvinism and sexist banter.

Galley Slave: 3.5 ⭐
US Robots lease robot EZ-27 to Northeastern University to be used as a proof reader/"Galley slave". After some allegedly inaccurate, career-ending corrections are made by "Easy" to a Professor's Magnum Opus, US Robots (along with Susan Calvin) find themselves in court as defendants. The final scene will have you questioning which side you were rooting for during the trial with an interesting debate on the potential for machines to replace man as creator/artist, "destroying the handcraftsman". An expansion on the idea put forth in "someday".

Little Lost Robot: 4 ⭐
Under government pressure, and without consultation with Dr.Calvin, US Robots have developed a number of NS-2 models with a modified First Law (deletion of the "not allowing a human to come to harm through inaction part"). Now, one has gone missing amongst 62 identical, un-serialed robots on the Hyperatomic Drive and it's up to Susan and Bogert to find it. A contemplative cat-and-mouse thriller that displays the incredible danger in modifying any of the 3 Laws.

Risk: 3.5 ⭐
The Parsec, along with it's robot pilot, is set for it's first trip into hyperspace but upon initiation, something on-board malfunctions. Someone must board the ship, at great risk to themselves and find the fault in order to deactivate the hyper drive. Calvin proves herself adept as a human psychologist as well as a robopsychologist as, in a characteristic display, she skillfully puppeteers the situation.

Escape: 3.5 ⭐
The paths of Susan Calvin and Powell and Donovan cross as 'Consolidated Robots', a rival to 'US robots' in the field of calculating machines, challenges the latter to create the first 'Hyperatomic/interstellar Drive', a task that, due to it's inherent dilemma regarding conflict with the First Law, destroyed their own machine.

Evidence: 3.5 ⭐
In the lead up to a Mayor election, candidate Stephen Byerley is accused of being a robot by "new school" politician, Francis Quinn. Alfred Lanning of US Robots is blackmailed into getting, begrudgingly, involved and with the help of Susan Calvin must help determine the truth of the accusations.

The Evitable Conflict: 3.5 ⭐
Presumably years after the previous Calvin story, Earth's economy is now Entirely based upon the decisions of calculating machines that have the good of humanity at heart. "The population of Earth knows that there will be no unemployment, no overproduction or shortages. Waste and famine are words in history books". Only there have been a number of problems presenting themselves all in a short period and Stephen Byerley (now employed as World Coordinator) has enlisted the help of Susan to discover the cause. Given any serious thought, quite a frightening conclusion!

Feminine Intuition: 3.5 ⭐
A robot built by Susan Calvin's successor, Clinton Madarian, is killed alongside it's creator holding information regarding 3 planets with a high probability of habitability. Susan, now in her 80s and long since retired is called in, to Bogert's displeasure, with the goal of retracing Madarian's steps and recovering said information. The last of the Susan Calvin stories and old age hasn't taken any of the edge off her trademark sharpness or the chill from her frosty demeanour.

PART VII: TWO CLIMAXES
... That Thou Art Mindful Of Him: 4 ⭐
A classic robot-as-menace story. How does a robot interpret the Three Laws when they begin to identify as human.The cold reasoning of George 9 and 10 along with their subtle manipulation of Harriman is insidious indeed.

The Bicentennial Man: 5 ⭐ 
Asimov’s philosophical and heartfelt masterpiece and the standout in the collection. Andrew Martin, a robot who has loyally served a family for decades wishes for his freedom and it is granted. Andrew’s story spans two centuries and sees him bear witness to the passing of several generations of the family that first purchased him and the ultimate end of the family-line. There is something so saddening about watching an essentially immortal being passing through time, watching generations of members of the same family pass away one after another until he is all that remains. What a terribly unique and lonely experience. Andrew begins a personal journey in which he seeks to become more and more human, ultimately culminating in a fight for full human rights. Along the way, he contributes to the human world in the fields of artistry, literature and prosthetics and in many ways becomes the very definition of “human”. All that stands in his way are the fears and prejudices of man.