Rating: 4/5

Imagine. The last you hear from one of your children is a hastily written letter as they embark on an odyssey across North America, destination Alaska. Later to be found dead (not a spoiler). This young man’s death in 1992, has been a topic of discussion, examination, and derision ever since.

Christopher McCandless was certainly a young man who marched to a different beat, some thought him strange. He was bright, and personable enough – at times. But he became obsessed about certain things – no different to many other young people we know. In fact, author – John Krakauer – no slouch himself when it comes to adventure, seems to be at pains to make the point. That Chris, although not adverse to risk – was no fool. He was a little unlucky. Yep – just a tad unlucky.

This man certainly had a chromic case of wanderlust (oh man, I can understand that), and he acted it out. He would give away all his money, before embarking on one of his journey’s and live rough, sleep with the homeless, forage the land for things to eat, take jobs, then leave at a moment’s notice. Wow – imagine. 

Anyway, his goal was to eventually trek/hitchhike to Alaska. He wandered off into the wild, totally underprepared (according to witnesses) for surviving in such conditions. 

Survive he did, until he didn’t. 

He was later found in an abandoned bus on a desolate trail. The author, through witness accounts, friends and family of Chris, correspondence and Chris’s own diary notes presents a case on how he believes Chris finally succumbed to the elements. Towards the end of this book, the author presents his evidence as if a lawyer prosecuting a case. Weaving the threads of evidence together to make a compelling case. 

These people (adventurers), seem to be cut from a different cloth to the rest of us. They seem to thrive on deprivation, fear, adrenaline. Pushing things to the very limit and then more. One can only admire them – preferably, from the comfort of an armchair.

Local inhabitants help him portage around a barrier……..Alex finds Mexicans to be warm, friendly people. Much more hospital than Americans…..

Please note, I do have an issue with this observation. That is, Mexicans are Americans too!

From someone who’s version of adventuring is to put on an extra layer of Vegemite on his morning toast, or even have two showers in one day – this amazing story, and the people in it, enthralled me. One of the greatest joys about reading is learning about people nothing like oneself. 

This did that.

4 Stars (almost 5)