Rating: 4/5

At first, I didn't like this at all. I kept groaning at the bad grammar and inconsistent tense and I had a vision of Miss Crabtree from The Little Rascals rolling in her grave. Then, sort of like Barack Obama and his position on gay marriage, my feelings about this book slowly-then-quickly evolved. Praise Evolution! 

My feelings changed when I finally realized that the poor grammar and odd tense shifts as well as the disorienting style (especially in the beginning) are intentional. Doh! After all, the story is presented by a cranked up narrator in first person POV and what more would you expect from a meth head? In that respect, Woodrell's writing is actually pretty brilliant.

Don't expect much of a story here. A murder mystery plot enters at about the halfway point, but it's not the focus of the novel and it doesn't resolve in the way murder mysteries usually do. With its angst-y mood and tone, this reminded me more of an expressionistic painting than a novel. I'm okay with that though. I just didn't expect it. 

Gay readers might balk at the somewhat stereotypical portrayal of the character of Jason (a "country queer" hairdresser who can't throw a decent punch), but I didn't. He's cast in a sympathetic light and all of the other characters (rednecks, pill-poppers and whores) are also semi-stereotypes. As long as everyone is treated equally, I'm a happy camper. Did I just come out the closet here on GR? Yay for me then. Sometimes I forget that that's a never-ending process.
 
The deadpan humor typical of Noir had me laughing at some lines and groaning at others. These are some of the lines I especially liked: 

"I … sweated like a beer bottle at a church picnic."

 "Regular citizens from all the ages were all over the park. They were apparently celebrating some fun moment from history that I don’t know about."

 "…staring toward the ceiling like she saw a weeping Jesus there invisible to all others."

 "She kept her chin in the air and sent her body after it."

"Their talk was at that level of loud the too-drunk-to-notice favor."

"These old boys thumped their fat bellies proudly, with a kind of strange confidence, like all that fat was so much fat in the bank, fat they figured to retire on someday and live off."

I especially like that last one. 

Some of Woodrell's writing is beautiful too, even when describing a less than beautiful scene. Here's just one example:

"This holler, at night or during the day, either one, had the shape of a collapsed big thing, something that had been running and running until it ran out of gas and flopped down exhausted exactly here. The houses were flung out along this deep crease in the hills and the crease surely did resemble the posture of a forlorn collapsed creature. Scrub timber and trash piles and vintage appliances spread down the slopes and all around the leaning houses to serve as a border between here and everything that wasn’t here."

By the end, I found myself truly admiring Woodrell's style and now I'm looking forward to reading his The Death of Sweet Mister with my "On The Southern Literary Trail" bookclub next month. I'm glad I got my feet wet with this one first.

3.5 stars. 

The cast:

(Jamalee a/k/a Tomato Red)

(Sammy Barlach - pronounced “Bar-Lack” not “Bar-Latch”, please and thankya)

I would have included a photo of Jason and Bev too, but I couldn't find a pretty enough one for Jason and I kept hitting porn sites while looking for Bev's.