Rating: 3/5

I'm not the biggest lover of historical fiction, especially going this far back in time, and although I admired Wolf's writing and her feminist, antiwar message here, Greek mythology isn't something that I'm likely to return to any time soon. If I'm honest, it doesn't really interest me. But as I'd never read anything on the subject before, I just thought, what the heck, give it a go.
I found Cassandra, an intense, ambitious and difficult work that crammed in lots of names and actions, which for a relatively slim novel covering such an epic theme was problematic, as Cassandra, through interior monologue, looks back over her life's main events as she awaits death, having fallen prisoner to the Greeks at the fall of Troy. She remembers peaceful scenes of a society balanced between matriarchy and patriarchy, a balance represented by the closeness and mutual counsel of her mother, Hecuba, and her father, Priam. Cassandra recalls how the war destroyed that delicate balance; matriarchal vision and patriarchal political power vied with one another and the patriarchy eventually won.

Wolf's searing identification with her protagonist is made explicit in the novel's opening passage where the reader witnesses the merging of the author's voice with Cassandra's. The book was written from within a repressive regime, and its allegorical function tends to suffocate its simple existence as fiction: as a visionary whose visions were doomed to be disregarded, Cassandra stands for the female writer who struggles to be heard. Further, her guilt at her part in Troy's crimes and betrayals stands for Wolf's lifelong sense of implication in Germany's errors and delusions. The parallels to the Cold War in the 80’s when the book was written are entirely implicit, but quite apparent. Strange to say that about a book set so far apart in time. This was very much an assertive novel, and one executed with great skill, but it's a case of admiring the writer a lot more than the subject matter.