Rating: 4/5

Although I'm reading these a bit out of order, courtesy the public library, it really doesn't matter much. The books tie together, but not in any critical way, so reading book 3 then book 9 then book 1 will not be a problem; you can jump in at any point.

I've read quite a few of these so far, and they're all consistently entertaining, informative, interesting, and have solid mysteries. Roberts' research into Roman culture, history, and details of life is excellent, and what he doesn't (or can't) know, he invents and extrapolates well.

Each mystery is a solid, well-crafted puzzler, largely related to Roman culture or historical events. This one sweeps a bit more broadly than most of the previous books, examining a major conspiracy that is an attempt to deal with the looming threat of the Republic's demise. Caesar and Pompey are fast approaching an inevitable collision, and we know how that turned out from history. Meanwhile most of Rome continues on life as they always have, ignoring the changes around them.

The main character of Decius is likeable and interesting, but refreshingly a man of his times - that is, he has no problem with slavery, regularly presumes Roman superiority to the world, and is not some magically "progressive" person from modern day transplanted into Rome. The only quibble I have is that the language and writing style is very modern and while he avoids (usually) modern idioms and colloquialisms, every once in a while one sneaks into dialog and the style feels too informal and comfortable for modern readers to fit Rome.

In this book, the mystery is very complicated and involves the final days of the Roman Republic, before Caesar takes power as dictator for life. The issues at hand are very Roman and slightly disconnected from modern life, which while difficult to sympathize with, is in my opinion brilliant, because it is a tale that could have only been told in Rome. In brief, Decius is accused of corruption after a brilliant defeat of Pirates around Cyprus, then his accuser is found dead and murder is alleged.

The conclusion of the book wraps up a somewhat confusing tangle of ancestry, elite and common families, Roman law, traditions, and so on and was one I could not see coming or work out in advance. The themes of living in the last days of a once-great republic are uncomfortably modern feeling as well.