Rating: 5/5

Once again, Meg Wolitzer proves to be a salve against the mediocre novel that I read immediately before her work. In this one, she chronicles a mid-90s August between a group of people adjusting to new realities after one of their own dies in a car crash.

Sara is a 30-something Japanese-studies graduate student, perpetually single and perpetually dating, who is unsure of where she is going in her life. Much of the first chapter is dedicated to her sense of identity, history and insecurity before her abrupt end. Then, by default, we shift to the companions with whom she'd been spending this month in a ramshackle beach house--her best friend Adam; a breakout famous playwright who is rooting around for his next project while preferring Sara's platonic company to that of the men he sleeps with; her childhood bestie, Maddy, lawyer and new mother, with whom she spent years at summer camp nursing that tenuous half-love, half-competition and resentment relationship so prevalent between girls; Peter, teacher, a friend from college and Maddy's husband who has some secrets; and Shawn, an aspiring musical composer, who didn't know Sara at all, and just started dating Adam, partly in the hopes of ingratiating himself in the other man's success.

Added to this after the death is Natalie, Sara's mother, who strives to understand her daughter through this perennial summer experience. Divorced, a serial dater herself and relatively open about sex, the two women shared a close, if somewhat stifling at times relationship. One of the little ironies is, unbeknownst to Natalie, how much Sara wanted to keep this particular experience separate from her relationship with her mother. Otherwise they were on the phone, gabbing and divulging stories about their men all the time, and they developed a special greeting based on their love of "The Wizard of Oz"--hence the title of the novel.

One thing that drew me into the novel is how inevitably self-centered people can be. As we took on the POVs of each of these characters (and, very briefly, that of their self-.serving and disinterested land lady,) we see how people place themselves in the middle of their own narratives. Sara played a big part, to everyone except Shawn, but she was always in a supporting role, of sorts--bolstering the sense of self in various ways for the POV. It just got me into thinking how natural and genuine this feels--that there's no way not to mold or justify relationships to fit your own narrative. Relationships, whether they be sexual or platonic (and there's a whole lot of talk about the differences and meanings of each) don't exist outside of the ego. There's no way to not be the center of your own life; yours is the only perspective to which you have access.

I like how this inevitably led all of the characters to be at least a little unlikeable--not downright monsters, but self-indulgent in their needs, both before and after Sara's death (and she herself was no different). Shawn was the outlier, of course, but rather than being a jarring presence, it's like we could understand the idea of sudden loss and personal agenda more complexly when we saw it from another angle, too. Also there were side characters to prod our leads every now and then, and the intriguing dynamics that built up between Natalie and each of the younger members of the house.

Sometimes this novel dipped into little conveniences, but never enough to break the spell of the whole. Wolitzer also didn't dwell too much in the depressing elements of grief; there's enough flashbacks and subtle wit to give nods to the comic side of life, that feeling, even when death doesn't loom large, of just trying to hang on.

I found this to be a poignant exploration of life and loss, relationships and identity. It passed my "talking to the characters obsessively while reading" test, too. :p. A true testament to the power of fiction.