Rating: 4/5

This book is certainly divisive, if the reviews of the most vocal could be summed up in a word. I respect the opinions of those who gave low reviews in defence of a bear who seems besieged by the philosophers in this book, when he would rather not be bothered. However, I wish to mention a point concerning this tense conference that we’ve helicoptered into the forest: it is an impotent and comical exercise in hubris to think that Winnie-the-Pooh could be disturbed by metaphysics or existentialism or any of these things. He has much more important things to concern himself with, namely honey and his friends. For those who think this book ridiculous, I’m sure that you can find plenty of serious books out there—but Winnie-the-Pooh is not serious either. Rather than break down each connection to each philosopher and cry foul when nothing really comes of it, I recommend asking the question, “Why is Pooh such a master of philosophy/life? Why would a philosopher care about Pooh and the balloon or the Useful Pot?” And the answer Pooh gives us indirectly is that he knows/doesn’t know all these things as he lives his life. Just like a student of language will ask questions of a native speaker which have never occurred to them before (subjunctive mood comes to mind), these philosophers ask questions only because they would not understand how Pooh goes through his life without them, as if he knows the answer and that is why he is content. In reality, Pooh does not know the answers to all of the philosophers’ questions, but the response he gives would blow them away anyway. Pooh is a native philosopher who puts to shame the humans who have only taken a few years of study of it, but have never (or rarely) gone into the forest itself. My advice is to read this book, chuckle in derision at the poor folks who struggle with Pooh’s ideas (meaning at the same time to transcend your own difficulty with them), and then go to the forest, eat some honey, and hold hands with a friend.