Rating: 5/5

5/5 ⭐

Full review on my Blog: The Dacian She-Wolf 🐺

It took me SO long to finish this monster book that I’ve been carrying around in my backpack for the past six months in every single underground or train ride, but I finally DID IT! I FINISHED IT, YAY ME.﻿

Stephen King never stops to amaze me with his brilliant mind and fabulous stories. I feel like his mind is always restless, always in a good mood to find the worst ways possible to scare the soul out of me. 

The King of Horror Stephen King is. No doubt. He is already used to this title and I am sure he accepts nothing less. 

  It
 is so far my favourite work of his. I lift it to the rank of a horror masterpiece. It is brilliant, it is amazing, it is incredible. Best horror I've read, hands down. It is macabre, it is sick, it is wrong, but the way it is put together lures you deep into the plot until the moment you realise you cannot get out until you finish. Your way through the plot is the devouring of the story. That’s all. 

This book is great, yeah, but have I told you why? No? Let me explain myself then. Everything is put in there with a precise purpose. Nothing is random. Every little detail has its own place in the mechanism of the storyline. 

Every single character has a strange particularity that makes him or her unique in his or her weirdness. Bill Denbrough stutters, Eddie Kaspbrak has all the malfunctions in the world, Ben Hanscom is fat, Richie Tozier has a big mouth getting him in big trouble, Mike Hanlon is a ‘black boy’, Stan Uris is ‘a Christ-killing Jew’ and Bev Marsh has some serious Daddy issues. But all of them make a common front, gathering their weirdness and awkwardness and becoming friends and partners in a demon’s annihilation. Which is also a peculiar thing to think about a group of schoolkids. But hey, as long as they face together Henry Bowers and Co., they can face together that ridiculously scary demon of a clown, right?

The research for this masterpiece has been intense because the facts are accurate and also searchable and also, different myths are combined, forming a common body. The myths are uprooted from their grounds and planted back again in the soil of an insignificant American town. How can this not be mind-blowing? 

So, with that being said, if you are a horror-freak or if you loved the movie, but did not read the book or if you are just plain curious, then you should totally and definitely check this book out! But first, make sure you are mentally prepared for it, because, well, it is a long, tough ride!