Rating: 4/5

Idleness was painful after so many years of wars, bitter governments, and trivial loves.

The profundity of Simón Bolívar’s vision became the bane of his life. He was destined to be the man who led the Latin American people to freedom from the imperial rule of Spain. Having broken the shackles of slavery he took over the uncontested leadership of the vast continent as the President with the singular aim of unifying the freed countries of the Americas into "the greatest republic the world has ever known,” a dream that was never to come true. In this historical novel, Marquez leads the reader to travel in the heavy footsteps of the despondent and disillusioned General on his final voyage along the Magdalena river to tell the unmagical story of shattered dreams, broken allegiances, dead glories - made all the more intolerable by the General’s terminal illness.

This is a portrait of the man, Simón José Antonio de la Santísima Trinidad Bolívar y Palacios, not a politico-military biography of the great General who came to be known as the Liberator, and to whom generations of Latin Americans have sung songs of praise and gratitude, and in our times have named their countries after him, finding in his person a newfound confidence to defy another empire in the north that sees them as “our backyard.” But here Marquez, without ever stating it, is poised to dispel the myths, spun, on one hand, by the great mass that loved and admired him and, on the other, by his enemies and detractors among his own people who had once broken the bread of victory alongside him in the wars of liberation.

Bolívar's rise and fall is told in flashbacks within the frame story of his last river journey, which he undertook when he renounced power after an assassination attempt, to highlight major events that shaped him to become the man we have come to know. An able soldier and a great military strategist always in a state of flux, he could enact whole battlefields on his mind's screen with all the moves and strategies to be employed for various contingencies, is now relegated to his sagging hammock in which, lying at night like a deadweight, he mumbles incomprehensible twaddle in the state of recurrent delirium, such that his faithful servant, José Palacios, cannot tell whether his master’s thoughts are trapped in the throes of a nightmare or entangled in the state of waking. 

  He was shaken by the overwhelming revelation that the headlong race between his misfortunes and his dreams was at that moment reaching the finish line. The rest was darkness, 'Damn it,' he sighed. 'How will I ever get out of this labyrinth!

He is stricken but not defeated. Life had already given him sufficient reasons for knowing that no defeat was the final one. 
He cooks up imaginary battles to wrest Riohacha from the insurgents who are destroying the unity of the continent, but suddenly finding his army on the defensive, crashes into his chair. One day he announces his immediate intention to pack up and set sail for Europe to die there; yet the next morning he takes baffling detours and lingers on for weeks in a place, waiting for some portent to tell him which way to go. In a Marquezian slant the rigours of madness become a saving virtue; it is precisely his illusions which are keeping him sane.

  But he could not renounce his infinite capacity for illusion at the very moment he needed it most... he saw fireflies where there were none.

During the last months of his life he became an ungainly mass of calcified bones and poisoned flesh held together by the pale leather of his cracking skin, whose purpose of mind no one understood, whose purpose of mind he himself did not understand.

Marquez evokes the starkly beautiful terrain of the Amazonian wild tropics with imagery that permeates the ancient landscape of his One Hundred Years of Solitude. It seems the General must have stopped at Macondo on his voyage along the Magdalena. Marquez does not mention the town perhaps because it’s fictional or does not fall along the coast, and this story is supposed to be an historically accurate depiction, which it is, save for some auxiliary details which are used to enhance Bolívar's character and to embolden his human dilemmas, enacted for the reader through the eyes of a man to whom the world had appeared a miasmic swamp of dead bodies and dead hopes. In that, Marquez has weaved an astounding horror story.

True to the maxim that there is humour in human tragedy, Marquez embellishes this sad story with the strokes of a tragicomedy in the General’s fatalistic and self-loathing utterances that confound and dishearten his loving supporters, but the General cares naught. I will illustrate it with two small examples.

A German adventurer came down to the continent to capture an oddity he’d heard described "a man with rooster claws," to put in a cage and display in European circuses. He told of his wish to the General when they met during the voyage along the river. The General had found another opportunity to direct his mordant sarcasm at himself. "I assure you you’ll earn more money showing me in a cage as the biggest damn fool in history.”

On the General's orders, his orderlies had taken on board an emaciated and limping dog found along the banks suffering from a horrible case of mange. The General bestowed special affections on the awful-looking creature, fed him by his own hand, played with him, and spent more time with him than he would with his young lover. After a few days on board….

  The General was taking the air in the stern when José Palacios pulled the dog over to him.
“What name shall we give him?” he asked.
The General did not even have to think about it.
“Bolívar,” he said.

June 2015