Rating: 4/5

I read this collection of 11 Lovecraft stories over a year ago now, so I don’t remember very much of each story. I gave the collection away to a friend of mine too, but I did find my notes and my ratings of each story. Except one! And I’ve written two reviews in a group read in “Weird fiction”, so copied those two in, at least. I think this book works as a great introduction to Lovecraft, if you’re curious and looking to explore his writing!

Here you go😊

The Nameless City - ★★★★★

A man discovers a lost and ancient city and decides to explore the secrets kept within. He sees that the city "had been mighty indeed, and wondered at the sources of its greatness". Just like I, who have discovered the mystical writings of Lovecraft, so too does this man venture forth into the unknown, for the reward is adventure and knowledge beyond compare. It might be scary and harrowing, but it's worth it: "I was more afraid than I could explain, but not enough to dull my thirst for wonder" and then "yet the tangible things I had seen made curiosity stronger than fear". 

I see myself in this man, as I too am obsessed with mystery and horror, I too have that "instinct for the strange and the unknown which had made me a wanderer upon the earth and a haunter of far, ancient and forbidden places", because "as always in my strange and roving existence, wonder soon drove out fear; for the luminous abyss and what it might contain presented a problem worthy of the greatest explorer". 

Aah, behold!

  That is not dead which can eternal lie,
And with strange aeons even death may die.

Herbert West-Reanimator - ★★★

The Lurking Fear - ★★★★★

Rats In the Walls - ★★

The Festival - ★★★★★

The Shunned House - ★★★★

The Horror at Red Hook - ★★★★

He - ★★★★★

The Call of Chtulhu - ★★★★★

The Hound - ★★★

I read this and then listened to episode 29 of "The H.P. Lovecraft Literary Podcast", which is about this story. They mentioned that Lovecraft dismissed it as a “piece of junk”, but also that he might have had "The Hound of the Baskervilles" in mind when writing it. Which I guess is somewhat obvious. I really liked it, though. A neat little horror story with stylish prose.

Sure, it's basically about two bored men messing about, but I think it's cool that they were very particular about the atmosphere when doing their recreational activities, as if they made it an artform. The rest is fairly downtrodden genre wise and wouldn't have been as enjoyable if it hadn't been for the execution.

The History of the Necronomicon - ?