Rating: 5/5

Here is what I wrote about this masterpiece when I first read it over 35 years ago (of course many years after the event, since obviously there was no Goodreads back in those days):

Absolutely in a class of its own. The obscenity of violence and perversion, told in a beautiful, blood-chillingly, and melancholy manner, is just overwhelming. Burgess at his worryingly best!

I think that’s still a fair assessment of this dystopian satire, which was first published in 1962, but like all classics doesn’t seem to have aged at all. If anything, this book is probably more relevant to today’s world than it was to the world of the early 60s.

I recently made a bit of a fool of myself for not remembering that the entire book was written in a slang that Burgess invented especially for this book—so it was definitely time for a reread! I only remembered that obscene sense of perversion the novel is so famous for. It’s funny how emotional impressions of a book always seem to trump intellectual ones!

A Clockwork Orange gained much of its fame and notoriety through the film adaptation by Stanley Kubrick in 1971. Although in my opinion that adaptation is nowhere near as impressive as the book—for example it tends to glance over state brutality (especially a kind of aversion therapy called the Ludovico Technique, in which the subject’s tendency to behave violently is associated with fear, dread, and physical sickness) and the entire redemptive element of the story—nevertheless, it means that almost everybody is familiar with the narrative and therefore it’s probably superfluous to summarise its salient features.

Anyway, my recent reread focussed very much on Nadsat, the slang Burgess invented for A Clockwork Orange. The term ‘nadsat’ is derived from the Russian suffix for -teen (надцать) and denotes the vernacular that Alex (the protagonist) and his ‘droogs’ [drugs, ‘friends’] (from друг) use. The purpose of this vernacular is actually to obfuscate the meanings of what Alex and his teen gang members are saying. For this reason the vernacular is really more like an argot and akin to a secret language. Nadsat is a peculiar mix of Russian (Burgess was a ‘bolshy’ [big, great] (from больший) leftie with definite communist leanings!), Cockney rhyming slang, and schoolboy slang. Most of the words in Nadsat are straight transliterations from Russian, e.g. ‘bezoomney’ [mad, crazy] (from безумный), or ‘moloko’ [milk] (from молоко), and of course ‘horrorshow’ [good, well, wonderful, excellent] (from хорошо). Examples from Cockney rhyming slang include ‘pretty polly’ [money] (from ‘lolly’, itself a slang word for money) or ‘cutter’ [same meaning] (from ‘bread-and-butter’), and ‘luscious glory’ [hair] (from ‘upper storey’ or ‘crowning glory’). The schoolboy slang terms in Nadsat are mostly based on syllable reduplication and similar devices, such as in ‘eggiweg’ [egg], ‘baddiwad’ [bad], ‘boomaboom’ [thunder], ‘boohoohoo’ [to cry], and ‘in-out in-out’ [sexual intercourse].

Verdict: Sometimes people aver that the use of Nadsat throughout this novel renders it almost impenetrable. But it’s well worth learning the basics of Nadsat since the novel’s overwhelming sense of pointless and obscene ultra-violence is in large part rooted in that argot. This is still one of my all-time favourite books. Very like horrorshow recommended, oh brothers!