Rating: 5/5

Enemy at the Gates is a narrative full of eye witness accounts that makes the battle of Stalingrad come to life. You will not be able to put it down. I promise you that this book will haunt you through the rest of your days.

I am haunted by the contents of this book. First, I read it on my kindle. I liked it so well that I ordered the audio version. I listened to the audio version two or three more times. As I read about 6th Army advancing toward Stalingrad I could see the dust of the panzers rising on the steppes. I could feel the hubris of the German conquerors and the panic of the Russian troops. At times, I felt like I was reincarnated and actually at the battle. I could almost feel the hunger pangs, bite of the cold, and smell of the bandages. I was left with vivid mental images of the desperation of men engaged in hand-to-hand and house-to-house street fighting in the frigid cold. Panzers could not elevate their guns low enough to fire at targets so close. Troops would be intermingled. Germans in the basement of a building were fighting Soviets on the first floor of the same building for days on end. I could feel the panic on the back of my neck as the author described the German ambulatory wounded fighting each other to board what could be the last flight out of the shrinking pocket around Stalingrad. Finally, I could feel the fear as the would-be conquerors surrendered and were marched off into captivity. Nearly all were never to be heard from again. 

The Russians saw the dust cloud of the advancing 6th Army and deserted by the droves rather than stand and fight the Wehrmacht. The Soviets addressed this crisis with the tried and true number one tool that Communism uses to motivate troops: A bullet to the back of the head. A commander of a Soviet Division executed every tenth man until his revolver was empty in an attempt to motivate the loyal soldiers that hadn’t deserted from his division. The NKVD routinely executed men in the rear echelon if they didn’t have the proper pass or if they somehow became separated from their units. They didn’t ask questions. Lose your way lose your pass and “kablam” to the back of your head! Isn’t socialism wonderful!!! Many Russians being ferried across the Volga to fight the Germans attempted to escape by diving into the river. They were shot in the back by the NKVD. It is estimated that 14,000 Russian Military personal were executed by fellow Russians during the battle of Stalingrad. That exceeds the Union and Confederate combined total casualties at the battle of Shiloh! This was desperation on an epic scale that the world had never seen before! 

Before long it would be the powers of the Axis that would suffer. Hitler makes many mistakes and there are consequences. In a move that defies all axioms of military science, Hitler orders 6th Army to halt and break contact with the fleeing Soviets so that 4th Panzer Army could cross its front in order to join Army Group A that was attempting to capture the oil fields in the Caucuses. This delayed the pursuit of the crumbling Soviets for a week and diluted the forces attacking Stalingrad. The author points out that Hitler’s imbecilic order would allow the Soviets to escape destruction, regroup, and live to fight another day. The Soviets were off the hook. Hitler later countermanded this disastrous order and redirected 4th Panzer Army to attack northeast towards Stalingrad but stripped it of key Panzer divisions. Later there would be a second German opportunity lost. This time it would be Paulus who would blunder. Paulus delayed and failed to link up with Papa Hoth’s 4th Panzer Army outside the city. The Germans could have destroyed two Soviet Armies on the open steppes just outside of Stalingrad. Instead, those armies were allowed to escape to the city and dig in. This set the stage for a house-to-house slug-fest that negated any tactical advantage that the Wehrmacht and blitzkrieg previously enjoyed.

The tide had turned. With 6th Army bogged down in street fighting in the city, Stalin was able to launch the great Soviet counter attack against German flanks guarded by comparatively weaker Italian, Romanian, and Hungarian troops. 6th Army would find itself encircled. The German men in the ranks didn’t panic. They had been cut off before. It was one of the realities of Blitzkrieg. Sometimes you advanced so fast and gained so much ground that you found yourself cut off in enemy territory. Stalingrad wasn’t the first time the Army had been cut off. At the time they could have easily broke out and retreated in good tactical order but Hitler wouldn’t allow it (this was the 3rd major blunder of the campaign). Goring promised to sustain Stalingrad by air. Only Goering and Hitler believed that the Luftwaffe could do it. No one else in an axis uniform believed this to be true. Von Manstein and Army Group Don tried to relieve 6th Army but they bogged down within 20 miles of Stalingrad. Von Manstein tried to persuade Paulus to disregard Hitler’s orders and break out towards the corridor provided by Army Group Don but Paulus refused. By the time Hitler’s chief of staff was able to convince Hitler to allow a withdrawal of 6th Army it was too late. 6th Army lacked the fuel and the Soviets were well entrenched in their rear. Hitler looked at his Chief of staff and threw his arms up in the air and said something like “what do you want me to do.” The gig was up for the paper-hanging, Austrian Corporal. There would be no more victory jigs for this guy. The battle was lost and so was the war. 

Off into captivity marched the remainder of 6th Army. The Russians officially said that the Wehrmacht wasn’t sufficiently vaccinated against typhus to account for the high death toll. That may be true but the Germans would find out that the gulag – the cornerstone of Soviet Communism - is almost as efficient a killing machine as the German concentration camps. The Italians told stories of brutal treatment and resorting to cannibalism to survive. Only a handful would survive the systematic starving of the gulags and ever see home again. 

Enemy at the Gates is a narrative full of eye witness accounts that makes the battle of Stalingrad come to life. You will not be able to put it down. I promise you that this book will haunt you through the rest of your days. It is nothing like the bad Hollywood movie of the same name. Enjoy!