Rating: 1/5

Susan Thorton wakes up in a mysterious hospital with no memories of who she is, where she works or where she came from. There is one memory that still haunts her fractured mind as clear as it once did, however. Her memories of the House of Thunder, a gloomy cave where a waterfall echoed like vengeful thunder as four men tortured her husband to death. There are four men roaming the hospital, all of them look identical to the men who ruined her life. Have they come back from the dead to get revenge for sending them to jail? Or is there a bigger conspiracy at play?

The premise of the story sounds really cool. Literal ghosts from the past coming back to make your life a living hell when you're left crippled in a hospital with no way out. Sounds terrifying and thrilling. Unfortunately, the premise is the only thing cool or interesting about this book in my opinion. Aside from that, it's honestly one of the most poorly written thrillers I've ever read. I've enjoyed quite a few of Koontz's books, even in spite of their obvious flaws and stilted dialogue, but this just took the flaws typically associated with his works and escalated them to cringe-inducing levels of bad.

The main character has inner monologues that last anywhere from 20-40 pages every other chapter, asking herself laughable questions with extremely obvious answers. Characters repeat the same statements, questions and answers over and over again, usually back to back three times in a row until they're beating a dead horse. Every bit of dialogue is awful and makes the romance, horror and comedic moments feel uncomfortably awkward. The simple premise is dragged out to nearly 400 pages of repeating the same inner monologues, horrendous interactions and tension that falls completely flat because of the constant backpedaling, tedious conversations and mind-numbing rambling. 

Not to mention the obvious yet equally lousy twist ending. The ending was like a really bad James Bond knockoff. The final twist turns into a cringy villain monologue where they spend 50 pages infodumping exposition about a government conspiracy which ends up amounting to nothing of importance. It was a struggle to push myself through this one. It just kept getting more boring, tedious and cringeworthy with every chapter, and the awful ending was just the rotten cherry on top. 

If nothing else, there were times where it was so bad that it actually gave me a good laugh, so I guess that counts for something.

***

If you're looking for dark ambient music that's perfect for reading horror, fantasy, sci-fi and other books like this one, then be sure to check out my YouTube Channel called Nightmarish Compositions: https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCPPs...