Rating: 5/5

This read reminded me of stage plays of the past with the actors giving their performances, the stage sets depicting bygone eras, the mechanics of these types of plays surreal and…….. I think it's the method of delivery by the author giving a beautiful account of the snooty upper classes of the time and their belittling attitudes to those less fortunate.

The setting of this book is just after the Franco Prussian war, England where Ellen Paget was born, stilted, extremely paternalistic, bigoted and snobbish. The aristocracy and gentry rule and women have no place other than to produce a male heir. Ellen had a twin brother that died at birth. Her father is a cold hearted man, frustrated with his misfortune of not having succeeded in a manner that he had wished and for which he levels his grievance toward Ellen, the female who had survived over the male brother who would have followed in the father's footsteps, or greater. His second wife made her dislike for Ellen obvious and like her sisters is sent to school in Brussels where Ellen has stayed and is now a teacher.

Ellen's father Luke Paget is faring even worse than usual, his second wife is now dead, caused by her insistence of using horses unsuitable for carriage work, an accident for which leaves him with a broken leg is now convalescing at his sister in law's, Lady Blanche and her Bishop of Chichester husband. The problem now is the need for someone to take on the overseeing of the Hermitage household for when Luke returns for which would normally be fulfilled by the wife. Lady Blanche has hired a Mrs Pike who seemingly comes with a good reference. However, Mrs Pike is not what she seems and nobody likes her. Luke's youngest daughter voices her opinion when visiting her father with her older brother and for which she is swiftly remonstrated by him.

Ellen enjoys her school teaching and the financial reward gives her independence, however suddenly all this changes when her Godmother Lady Morningquest visits the school hoping to hire a sensible young teacher for a royal Parisian household. She is rather taken aback when the Directress suggests Ellen who is now an experienced teacher and much loved by her pupils. She insists that she goes to Paris with her Godmother to take up the required position as companion and governess to the only child, a four year old daughter. The real reason for this insistence is not revealed until much later in the book.

Ellen is introduced to a life of glamour and luxury, her apartment as governess is in complete contrast to that of the Brussel's school. The Comtesse de la Ferté is self indulgent and spends her time with her female friend and lover, for which Ellen takes a little time absorbing this type of relationship, (approximately the first wave of feminism), the Countess's friend Germaine a published author of little repute follows two patterns of life interchanging her appearance from female to male dressing. The Count on the other hand spends most of his time gambling at the gaming tables that he has established within the household of Hôtel Caudebec.

Ellen slowly makes progress with the spoiled child by being inventive in order to hold the child's attention, earning her approval from the father, the Count. Ellen admires the new philosophers that are in Paris at this time and for which the Countess holds many soirees to invite such notables and to entertain her friends and for which Ellen attends in her free time.

Like all good stories, it all comes hurtling down, a murder suicide takes place at the Hôtel Caudebec for which the Count is taken into custody. Ellen's sister arrives in time to arrange for her return to England and to fill her in on the family’s grievances regarding Mrs Pike, eventually discovering her lies and opportunistic actions and finally her dismissal. Luke Paget finally realises all his mistakes and for Ellen a marriage proposal.