Rating: 2/5

He's not stupid, but I don't like him. He goes out of his way to shock people, to make himself unpleasant.

I enjoy a juicy controversy. I support writers who show courage to take on controversial ideas and contentious issues and put them to a test of literature, to examine its ins and outs with an honesty and skill required of an artist, without a care for what the easily-offended might say (e.g; I’m incensed when some self-righteous people denounce Lolita solely for the nature of its topic)

Now that out of the way, it seems that Michel Houellebecq modus operandi is to think up cardboard characters (largely indistinguishable from one another) and have them utter the most outrageous things to trigger as many people as possible and see how much of a stir he can make; and while he’s at it, spice it up with a repetition of crass, tasteless, pornographic sex scenes to lure those readers who’d otherwise might not have an interest in reading his books. Say more outrageous things amid the orgasmic din of double penetration and flood of semenic spurts. And let’s repeat that again for the next 50 pages.

In a nutshell, it is a brutal satire of the West, a bitter social critique - which more often than not turns into crude and toneless social commentary - of the continent's self-image and its institutions. The underlying premise is interesting: the West is on the path to irreversible decline, society and culture are on the edge if haven’t already become a caricature of themselves, social breakdown has led to the loss of love and intimacy, and the people have lost the most precious thing in life: true sexual fulfillment and the honesty to seek it. These are fascinating parameters and, no doubt, would ruffle many feathers. The game’s on!

I was sufficiently engaged for one-third of the novel when the protagonist and his group had been travelling in Thailand. I found their reactions to the new experience of Asia, their preconceived notions about culture and people being subjected to satire. So far so funny, but he lost me soon and it became an ordeal to read through the rest of the story.

I might be guilty of over-interpreting if I entertain the view that the writer might have created his namesake protagonist as an inelegant, unpleasant, alienated, dead-faced, mirthless, interesting-in-nothing-whatever, but passably handsome and sex-obsessed, middle-aged French male of middling career as a symbol of the decaying West itself, out there to find sexual-spiritual nirvana by exoticising the nimble, undemanding, submissive, uncomplaining bodies of Asian prostitutes. It is, again, the exotic East where the West finds its own self! If that is so, it makes a lot of sense why he – and his lover Valerie – are the way they are. 

But this still doesn’t solve the problem of him failing to get things off the ground. The dry, plotless, flat stretches of text bereft of colour, sudden and unjustifiable shifts of perspective and locations, and an oversupply of porn makes it a cumbersome read. So much so that when I turned over the last page the whole experience of reading it compared with having been come at in the face.

I don’t even need to touch on the so-called controversies he so loves to start up. There is little of the intelligent treatment of any ideas and views his characters have. Whether it’s naked misogyny, borderline racism and bigotry, nouveau Orientalism, thinly disguised Islamophobia – everything is thrown in into the mix, uncooked. Some who have read it in French have commented on the poor quality of the English translation. That might be the case, but I still can’t see how a better translation will salvage the novel from the aforementioned criticisms.

October '18