Rating: 4/5

Just leave the Milk Bar to go bonkers 
 
Not as awesome as expected 
A classic, probably a bit overrated book, and one of the rare cases in which I would say that the movie is better than the book. The most unnecessary thing was to add an extra chapter at the end that took the flow, logic, and atmosphere out of the whole thing. Nice development of an own language, but also not as cool as other examples. The whole dystopic brainwashing idea is one of the best elements.
 
It reminds me of many overrated classics that form 3 stages or categories of boredom.
 
Books that for no understandable reason have to be read in school, depending on the country's culture, and are mainly focused on the bad, outdated, old, very long time dead, writers of each country, so that there are individual purgatories for young readers in each state.
 
Nobel prize, nothing to add, the same with peace and economics, it´s just a bad joke. But many don´t seem to get it and take it seriously. 
 
Be creative without caring about conventions
Clockwork Orange is in the third category: Books that use complex, not absolutely logical or even not for the author understandable, unstable plots and inconsistent ideas to be progressive, provocative, and sell more by activating the bite reflexes of conservatives, bigots, and philistines and give nothing on the thousands of years old conventions of writing for the pleasure of the reader. I´ve read much of all 3 categories and must say that it´s the same as with modern art: If there is no recognizable concept, many others could do the same, and if it´s not universally acclaimed a masterpiece, it´s probably average or completely inexplicably overhyped trash. 
 
One hit wonder if average ratings of the author´s other works aren´t that thrilling
Clockwork Orange is one of the better ones, but it would be nothing without Kubricks´adaption, and looking at the general ratings and popularity of all of Burgess´other works, one can see the picture of a one hit wonder.

Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: 
https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...