Rating: 2/5

I'll admit to expecting much from this book - fairly glowing reviews from the blats and likened unto a 20th Century great in the Master and Margarita. In truth, it in no way approaches the depth and 'mastery' Bulgakov’s wonderful book.

Instead what we get is a pretty strong narrative leading Rubashov through all the trouble spots from his initial contract with the devil at one millennium till his release at the next. These events are written pretty loosely and almost in an ‘airport blockbuster’ style which begins to tire after a while. Just when you think it is going to get interesting with a piece on the nature of time Vallgren decides that he’s run out of ideas – or rather that the ideas he is approaching require the depth of imagination and pure writing skill that he does not have and it becomes a series of disjointed focus-less pieces dragging on towards the final dissolution. 

Throughout this book we get flavours and instances - ‘tastes’ of other books; Bulgakov’s classic, Grass’ Danzig trilogy, touches of Turn of the Screw, down to poor old Dennis Wheatley but nothing is pushed, nothing is really thought out and expedited through the writing. None of what one might expect to be approached by such a subject is followed through. Instead it’s like a toddler playing with his food. Finally it became a chore to finish the book and I was left with the feeling of Vallgren as a hack rather than a poet.

To mention The Master and Margarita in connection with this book is a rare piece of sacrilege endemic in a slack publishing business. True Vallgren is a star in his own right but it is towards the airport blockbuster novel he should look and not towards association with classic literature. This and the crucial lack of development in certain parts of the book and its shying away from any depth in it’s themes, and his previous works tendency to long-winded titles lead me to believe that he is a darling for the World of Publishing and will be a star despite the shallowness of his own writing. He appears made for an industry hooked on sales figures and fame rather than depth and dissertation.