Rating: 3/5

I don't understand why...Scholastic would have this as a thriller?

The UK equivalent of Point Horror doesn't even have it as such.

If you had to compare it to anything of a "thriller/horror" genre it would be kind of like something classic and gothic such as Turn Of The Screw or Rebecca. Truthfully, it doesn't even feel like that if I'm honest.

More like Wuthering Heights.

Robert Westall is good with details in his prose and that was intriguing again like reading something more classic than contemporary. It's set against the start of Britain's involvement in World War II and is either England or Scotland because there is a lot of dialogue that indicates the latter.

Mostly the word "bairn" which is a baby or a child which is how I get that vibe.

The blurb on the back is accurate in a roundabout way.

Bob Bickerstaffe is our narrator as an older man recounting a time in his youth where he was fourteen going on fifteen. We get stories about a time before then but most of the story hinges on his teen years.

At school once the boys and girls have classes together with boys on one side and girls on another, Bob notices a girl with a beautiful nose, gray-green eyes like an angel and red-gold hair like a sunset.

He soon finds her name to be Valerie Monkton and she is the daughter of his father's boss. Most of the time she is absent but when she is there, Bob can not help but stare at her. Soon, Valerie notices his glances and talks to him slightly. Bob tries to act like he doesn't care so he doesn't get ridiculed by his fellow males.

Bob, however, is more mature than the other boys his age and secretly is pleased to have her attention. Valerie talks to her parents about Bob and his parents relay that the more well to do Monkton family would like to invite him over for tea.

Bob goes and there is a slight budding of romance between he and Valerie yet she is just as fiery as her hair but as fragile as the porcelain china of their tea. By the way Valerie's parents and his own act, Bob soon finds that Valerie is ill and doctors say she won't live for much longer.

The Monktons want Bob to be around their daughter to give her a little bit of happiness in her final days and Bob can't help but be protective of Valerie. When they are able to be alone, Bob takes Valerie for walks about the town and beach even though she has been told not to because of her delicate health.

Valerie tells Bob she has nightmares about being lost with no one to find her and when he upsets her and Valerie asks Bob to promise that he will always find her...he agrees. The last walk they go on ends disastrously when her parents find out Valerie has been going out and they forbid Bob to come back and upset her health.

World War II happens not long after that.

Bob is soon welcomed back to the Monkton house when Valerie's health is having her at her most dire hour. They stay under watch of her mother and with their bond mended, Valerie is once again happy for but a moment.

Bob soon is told that Valerie has died and he has no idea that the promise he made to her will be kept. Her body is soon gone to the earth and then taken by the evil of war but Valerie's spirit remains waiting for Bob to find her as he agreed.

Bob is too good for this Earth and he plans to keep his promise at any cost even if it may be his own life...

I won't spoil much else but it is very hard not to although the outcome is not too hard to figure out since it is an older Bob telling us this story. 

I liked it but I didn't necessarily love it. It has aspects to my taste of romance but we take just a little too long to get to the real heart of this story.

The romance between Bob and Valerie is very chaste with a few kisses and caresses but nothing tawdry. It also takes awhile to get to the supernatural twist in this tale and the ending was tragic.

Anything set against the backdrop of WWII is bound to be tragic but there was an air of healing amongst the characters. I'm still slightly confused about just what resolved the conflict but maybe I just missed it.

If you are a fan of of classic literature from any of the Bronte sisters or have a taste for films like the ones I mentioned before hand, I can recommend this book to you.

If you are fond of literature that deals with WWII, it might be your cup of tea as well.

If you were expecting a different kind of ghost story with more of an edge, The Promise may not be for you.