Rating: 5/5

‘You play, you win, you play, you lose. You play.’

For over a decade I’ve referred to this novel as a favorite and upon a reread I have reaffirmed this statement while also finding a new depth and enjoyment beyond my already heartfelt appreciation for Winterson’s work. ‘The Passion’ is an incredible epic in miniature, weaving together the fates of Henri, a soldier in Napoleon’s army, with that of Villanelle, a Venetian gambler who is the daughter of a boatman all in under 200 pages of prose that shines like a star to which you’d chart your emotional map. This is a novel bursting with ideas as Winterson tackles themes surrounding the question of what is passion and how does it inform your actions, from the religious fervor of Napoleon devotees willing to lay down their life for Nationalistic expansion to an exquisite but taboo love affair that blossoms despite bittersweet assumptions of ephemerality. Reading much like a fairy tale but also grounded in historical fiction of the Napoleonic wars, Winterson questions faith from many angles and, through giving voice to those often made voiceless, tells a captivating tale that will break your heart but only to transform it into something stronger and full of magic.

‘[D]o it from the heart or not at all.’

Rereading books seems to reinforce the idea that you can’t step in the same river twice, especially when reading again in a different decade of your life. Beyond noticing different aspects, the reader’s heart clings to different elements that compliment their current aches and the intellect processes everything in relation to the world as it currently understands it. Different aspects from both Villanelle and Henri's narratives were highlighted for me in the reread, and the examinations of violent nationalism and warnings against hero worship of political figures took on a different tone today as it did before. The aspects of gender fluidity as well was quite interesting now with a better working language to interpret it and I enjoyed to see how progressive this novel was for its time. The biggest thing I noticed was that this book is indeed amazing and I would be reading many more Winterson books.

Which is why we reread I suppose, to better observe and understand as well as relieve the love for a good book. The Passion is a perfect book for this as it unlocks itself more upon each reading if only because there is so much going on expressed succinctly but unfolds into complex and expansive ideas when analyzed. The prose reaches to the stratosphere in its beauty but it also feels so refined and tightly packed, elegantly tracing its path through highly nuanced themes while knotting them all together for an overall emotional and cerebral impact. Add to that the elements of magic and the epic tones that drench the scenes of doomed romance and damned men and you’ll begin to gather how this novel so effectively can conquer your heart.

‘I’m telling you stories. Trust me.’

There is an interesting dynamic to the magical realism at play within the novel. In the early pages we hear of fantastical events, such as the Venetian boatmen’s webbed feet, hearts in a jar outside a living body, or the Irish priest Patrick’s ‘eagle eye’ that can see a woman remove her clothes from miles away. We only experience these as unverified stories told to us, however, as the novel progresses these stories are often corroborated by secondary sources. Henri retrieves the heart and, to his surprise, discovers Villanelle’s story is literal and not a metaphor and Napoleon’s men pay a woman to stand five miles away in order to test Patrick’s vision claims. In all these instances another witness is also present: you, the reader. In a book about questioning faith, the magical realism elements are aspects you initially have no choice but to accept on faith in the framework of the novel and, much like a fairy tale, likely think of it as a flair of storytelling. By making the reader a witness in the moments these aspects are verified by other characters who had also questioned their validity, it grounds the novel into one about accepting and experiencing the fantastical as an aspect of everyday reality, to enter the realism hand-in-hand with the magical and find them one and the same. 

Having the novel be rooted in historical fiction only doubles down on this effect and also allows the history to cast its weight into the tone and experience of the book. The major players, such as Napoleon, Josephine or the Czar, are minor characters here, positioning the story instead around the experience of marginalized voices—an army deserter and a bisexual woman in occupied territory—and returns history into the hands of common people. ‘We are a lukewarm people,’ Henri writes, ‘and our longing for freedom is our longing for love.’ The novel looks at the way history is shaped and rewritten through wars and conquests and the ways a political leader can rally an army to die for them, how social roles are embedded into society to perpetuate warmaking—such as Henri being told from a young age that ‘soldiering is a fine life for a boy—along with many other methods of nationalistic pride. This worldview shifts as the ghosts of fallen comrades haunt Henri and crack the veneer of his devotion to Napoleon, realizing the quest for power and territory was a game to the wealthy while the average citizen paid for it with their lives. ‘He was trying to found a dynasty,’ Henri reflects, ‘we were fighting for our lives.’ When 2,000 men die in a training exercise, 2,000 new recruits march in the next day because the powerful have found the strategy to manipulate others to die for them out of a feeling of passion.

‘We fear passion and laugh at too much love and those who love too much’

Henri writes ‘If we had the courage to love we would not so value these acts of war.’ In his youth he wished to have passion for religion and a belief in god. ‘Surely a god can meet passion with passion?’ he asks, but when he finds that intensity unmet in religion he unconsciously seeks out a new target for his passion and finds one in Napoleon Bonaparte. As did many other young men who were willing to die for their leader. This is contrasted with Villanelle for whom the object of passion is a woman she cannot openly love and the inability to be consumed by her passion redirects her life to the ill wishes of abusive men and warmakers. Villanelle's relationship with the older woman is inspired by Winterson's own relationship with her editor, Pat Kavanagh, who was married to author Julian Barnes. ‘I wrote The Passion for her, and I loved her very much,’ Jeanette Winterson wrote after Kavanagh passed in 2008. This is a novel full of passion that becomes frustrated in the face of unrequited or impossible loves, and a search for purpose and meaning that extends beyond oneself.

The falling out of faith in Napoleon feels much like a falling away from religion as well as a falling out of love ‘I don’t want to worship him anymore,’ he writes, ‘I want to make my own mistakes. I want to die in my time.’ The opposite of passion is a hate that begins to consume him:
 ‘If the love was passion, the hate will be obsession. A need to see the once-loved weak and cowed and beneath pity. Disgust is close and dignity is far away. The hate is not only for the once-loved, it’s for yourself too; how could you have ever loved this?’
The falling away from Napoleon is entrenched in the realization that the powerful use the lives of those beneath them for their own purposes, and there is no end to their greed. ‘I thought he’d end wars forever,’ Henri muses on being duped when he realizes ‘one more and then there’ll be peace but it’s always one more.’ He also recognizes there is no end to wars once they begin, and victory means endlessly defending territory populated by those who hate you. The passionate intenisty of warmaking begins to be paralleled with the act of gambling in Villanelle’s storyline, in which she insists ‘gambling is not a vice, it is an expression of our humanness…some do it at the gambling table, some do not.’ She tells a story of a mysterious gambler, one of the most standout moments in the book, honestly, and the juxtaposition between war and gambling begins to truly shine.

‘In between freezing and melting. In between love and despair. In between fear and sex, passion is.’

A favorite aspect of this novel for me are the parallels and the interacting storylines. Henri speaks of living with ‘heartless men,’ a figurative expression he invests his thoughts into as he thinks of the hardness and loss of humanity he and his fellow soldiers experience in order to survive war and the ‘zero winter’ as they invade Russia.
’To survive zero winter and that war we made a pyre of our hearts and put them aside forever. There’s no pawnshop for the heart. You can’t take it in and leave it awhile in a clean cloth and redeem it in better times.’
This passage almost perfectly expresses Villanelle’s story, having her heart of fire in passion but then having to leave it outside herself. Literally. The two narratives inform upon each other in ways that enhance each theme, allow for a multitude of vantage points on the ideas and become a joint commentary greater than the sum of their convergences. The novel, told in retrospect, also charmingly finds certain lines of narration to be borrowed from other character’s speech when the storylines finally intersect. Henri’s musings on if no two snowflakes truly are the same early in the novel seems to have been informed by something Villanelle says when they meet: ‘’Snowflakes. Think of that.’ I did think of that and I fell in love with her.’ There is a lasting bond between characters that transcends even their words when we see their word choice being indebted to their feelings for the other. 

‘To love someone else enough to forget about yourself even for one moment is to be free.’

Speaking of words, there are some of the most beautiful passages on the idea of passion and love in this book. Winterson hits hard with some genuine gems:
‘I say I’m in love with her. What does that mean?
It means I review my future and my past in the light of this feeling. It is as though I wrote in a foreign language that I am suddenly able to read. Wordlessly, she explains me to myself.’
When Henri writes ‘When I fell in love it was as though I looked into a mirror for the first time and saw myself,’ we see the way he has absorbed Villanelle into himself, with her own words coming out through his ideas as he writes this novel decades after the events that transpire. It is her explaining him to himself, even if she does not know it.

‘Pleasure on the edge of danger is sweet. It’s the gambler’s sense of losing that makes winning an act of love.’

But the most moving aspect of the story is the love experienced by Villanelle and the tragic circumstances that keep her from being fulfilled. There is a longing that screams from the pages, a tenderness and trepidation that puts the reader right back to youthful moments of first love. ‘There is no sense in loving someone you can never wake up to except by chance,’ she fears, and the passages of their nine nights together are as beautiful as they are heart wrenching. Having read Winterson’s memoir, Why Be Happy When You Could Be Normal?, one can’t help but wonder how much autobiography made it’s way into this character. The aspect that Villanelle is always in disguise—often in a mask, dressed as a boy or wearing a mustache—reflects her examination of herself and sexual identity. This is reflected as well in descriptions of Venice:
‘This is the city of disguises. What you are one day will not constrain you on the next. You may explore yourself freely and, if you have wit or wealth, no one will stand in your way.’
This passage acknowledges the class aspects that inform much of the novel and how being outside the upper echelons is a reduction in freedom, but also how much place and the people from there are reflections on each other in this book. Villanelle is very much the city itself, fluid and malleable from day to day. On my first read of this in college, Villanelle was the first character like this I had encountered and I identified with her immediately. Upon the reread I’ve continued to identify with her and would offer her up as one of my favorite literary characters ever, a character so compellingly easy to fall for.

‘Every moment you steal from the present is a moment you have lost for ever. There's only now.’

Jeannette Winterson’s The Passion is an absolute favorite novel that, like the heart hidden in a jar, now contains my heart within its pages. It is a feast of emotions and insight, with passages that will stir every corner of your heart as well as your mind. The commentary on many types of passion, the meaning of love and faith, the rejection of endless wars, and more make up an extraordinary little novel that lives on in the reader much more substantially than the length of the book. I am happy to have reread this, relived the struggles alongside the character, and been dazzled by Winterson’s magic yet again.

5/5

‘To love someone else is to forget about yourself… through the flesh we are set free. Our desire for another will lift us out of ourselves more cleanly than anything divine.’

  

I got to meet Winterson at Hay Festival in Wales the spring of 2024. What a great day, what a lovely person.