Rating: 3/5

A mummy re-awakened in Edwardian London ... what's not to love?! Well ...

First things first, what is this book about?
An archaeologist uncovers a tomb that contains none other than Ramses the Great - or Ramses the Damned, depending on which source you believe. This shouldn't be possible, except that good old Ramses apparently drank some sort of elixir making him immortal, explaining not only where he was found but also the writing uncovered around the mummy.
A family plot means the archaeologist dies soon after his discovery but Ramses ends up in the posession of the archaeologist's daughter and heir where he learns about everything he's missed since he "went to sleep". 
There are a lot of plots, a lot of furtune-seeking, a lot of gambling, and a lot of murderous intent in this story.

So, technically, I should have fallen for this quicker than when I slip on a ptach of ice in winter. But I didn't. 
You see, this seems to be a general problem with Anne Rice's stories: I looove the concept and everything I hear about them but when I read them, I'm disappointed in the execution. *sighs*

In this particular case, I just don't see why it is so damned important to undelrine how buxom Julie or how hot Ramses is. It was also quite unrealistic that they'd both eye each other lustfully all the time only for them to tell us via their inner monologue that it isn't just sexual attraction / their looks.

Maybe I am a bit cranky because I went in with the wrong expectations. I wanted history and mythology, maybe combined with some cool Edwardian-London-vibe. And don't get me wrong, there were moments when we got that. Absolutely. But only sporadically. A healthy portion of this book was the romance. And it all lacked tension. How murderous plots can lack tension, I can't tell you. The book simply couldn't really make me care for a character (or hate them fully) and there was too little The Mummy in this.

The writing style, equally, had its moments, but was nothing special.

Like I said, this has happened to me before with this author so I think it's just me expecting the wrong thing and then being disappointed. Sadly, though, this means that I shan't finish the trilogy.