Rating: 5/5

THE MAN THAT HATH NO MUSIC IN HIMSELF,
NOR IS MOVED WITH CONCORD OF SWEET SOUNDS,
IS FIT FOR TREASON, STRATAGEMS AND SPOILS;
THE MOTIONS OF HIS SPIRIT ARE DULL AS NIGHT,
AND HIS AFFECTIONS DARK AS EREBUS.
LET NO SUCH MAN BE TRUSTED.
Shakespeare, Merchant of Venice.

No one in entre-deux-guerres Vienna of prim and proper upbringing really trusted the man Sigmund Freud. For his affections, as the Bard says, seemed as dark as the world of Erebus, the dwelling place of the Dead. 

What business was it of any gentleman to openly discuss abnormal intimacy? Really!

But Freud was only following his own path, as Carl Jung would soon put it, of Individuation. And Jung selected the dramatic coming of age moment in Daphne du Maurier’s early novel Jamaica Inn as symbolic of that turnaround into selfhood.

But there are big obstacles to that now. Sublimation is key. What else is there, Freud asks - polymorphous perversity? Heaven forbid.

Now alas, civilization has declined into 'been there, done that' - and our governments concur. This is the way the world ends: not with a bang but a whimper!

My own jejune efforts at individuation were nipped in the bud, cause I was an absurd individual, and certainly a round peg in a square hole! I simply wanted to be straight.

And Freud was just making HIS own Mid-Life Crisis PUBLIC - really growing is hard to do without risking prolonged exposure to the Real World. And the Real World is ugly.

But, to make the Bard’s prophecy above complete, Freud HATED MUSIC. Do you?

Hey, I don’t think he’d care for Thousand Foot Crutch (not surprising for a guy who distrusted believers as well, is it? Heh, heh)... no, this man had no music in his soul. Truth alone satisfied.

As a pampered child he would Scream in Protest the moment anyone - anyone! - sounded a note on the piano. So no one ever played it in his parents’ house. Point final!

Yikes. And when the adult Freud started a new project as an adult, no one who knew him DARED discourage him. And his primary pet project was psychoanalyzing himself - and his resultantly mixed-up family. 

Freud’s kids ended up in pretty rough shape after all of his acting out a Watchful Big Brother rôle, overseeing ‘em. Like happened to me.

Goodbye to their infantile daydreaming, and welcome to an alarmingly premature adulthood, kids!

Yikes again.

So, anyway, when this little book appeared early in the progress of his self-analysis, the good citizens of Vienna were mightily taken aback by his theory of the repression of primitive desires being a necessary byproduct of civilization.

What a dirty old man, this Herr Doktor! they said. 

And rightly so?

For the European World of ethical high-mindedness that Freud’s compatriots knew was being threatened by an Earth-Shakingly Global Coming of Age - 

Which would change the way we moderns see that ancient God, Eros.

To which most moderns say good riddance to bad hypocrisies...

But I’m not so sure...

For discretion, politeness and a decent sense of couth seem now to have vanished like the Dodo with the old holier-than-thou gentry!

But of COURSE you were right, in a way, Sigmund...

But did you HAVE to throw out the Baby of Decency with the Bathwater of Sexual Repression?