Rating: 5/5

Here i am thinking i can't get anymore surprise from Sydney...then this book hit's me with a BAM!

Dont get me wrong, i know Syd is full of twists and turn so i know, before even oppening this book that it is going to be a WOW. BUt i neve expect it to blow my mind!

I was reading the first few chapters and i keep turning the cover, making sure it was Sydney's work because this one was totally different! It has ALIENS! I mean can you believe it! I have read about yakuza'a, mobbs, lawyer, but never did i expect from Sydney ALIENS and UFOS!

Sydney has an amazing writing! I dont even know why im saying this, knowing im sure EVERYONE already knows that. It's like saying the heart is red or the sky is blue. It is THAT obvious.

I have read pretty much all of he's book and never have i been disappointed! (i mean, i did get disappointed...once but blame it on the ebook!) 

Chapter one, yup just on chapter one, i felt the depth of the characters pain. I felt he's love and felt sorry for him, just by reading a 3-page chapter I already felt connected. I understood he yearned for he's ex-wife..Just by a single phone-communication that lasted for a what? a minute??

THAT IS HOW GOOD SYDNEY IS!!! HE IS LIKE THE BEST WRITER THAT HAS EVER DAMN LIVED!!!!!!!!

Damn all those people who gave this book 3-below star. That's just STUPID (SORRY! i dont like it if people hates my favorite writer!)

Anyway. I have never, and I mean ever LIKED books that which revolves around male POV before, but becuase of this book, i changed my mind. Actually i started hating mystery books, but reading this has turned me around.

Uh-OH! MAJOR VENTING COMING UP!

My only complaint, being a hopeless romantic that i am is how the Alien woman didn't end up with the Robert! Why can't Sydney be more romantic! Why didn't he broke Robert's ex-wife's heart like she broke he's! I wanted to make he's ex-wife suffer and I MEAN SUFFER REAL REAL BAD! she sounds like a nice gal but still she broke his heart! That evil evil SWINE!!! UGGGHHHHHH!!!!!!!!

 I hated it when they got up together!!!!! She does not deserve Robert! I want her to realize she lover Robert, leave her present husband (SHE BROKE UP WITH ROBERT BECAUSE OF FREAKING HIM!!!!!!), tries to go back with Robert but he already met that beutiful alien lady and during their escapes and adventures trying not to get killed, they fell in love, and so Robert tells her 'goodbye, but im in love with her' and then she's like 'I shoudn't have ever left you go' and then theirs me 'YOUR FAULT B*TCH!'

I swear i never use the B word but gosh that woman pushed my buttons!

 enough with that... anyway. READ THE FREAKING BOOK!