Rating: 2/5

The first Eva Ibbotson book I ever read was A Countess Below Stairs and I was reluctant to buy any of the other books because I really did not see how she could top it. Regardless I have faith in authors with their craft so I took the plunge with The Morning Gift (I’m a sucker for pretty covers really). 

And then I hit my head on the diving board.

I usually read books within a few hours to a day depending on how focused I am and how much I love the book. Reading the first half of the book took me literally days. Books are the reason why I procrastinate. Homework became the reason why I procrastinated on reading The Morning Gift. Terrible? Yes. 

The book starts off incredibly slow and it’s like reading one of those boring history books that have a ton information so you skim and glean, but never really retaining anything, just trying to get through it to get to the good stuff. The gore. The battles. The love. The romance. Then you realize “Oh shit, I just skipped something important” later on in the book and have to turn back and go “WTF?”

I mean, I understand that this is in WWII. You have to set the setting. Ibbotson did the same thing with Countess but she did it in a swift manner that allowed the reader to get through and then focus on the characters but seriously what happened in Morning Gift? We know the history, but now let’s learn the character’s history and story. MOVE. ON.

After half the book has bored you, you get a great jolt of excitement and joy that the book is finally coming together in true Eva Ibbotson form and you start to think “YES YES YES! FINALLY!” and you start loving it…. And then you start to drown.

The Morning Gift revolves around Ruth Berger, the only daughter of a Jewish-Austrian professor and is part of an eclectic family. Most of the family members have a cute love story. Even Ruth has a cute love story: Heini, a gifted prodigy of a pianist, started to mooch live with the Bergers and they have a cute Mozart and his starling story. Cute cute cute. Ruth also happens to be somewhat of a child genius herself with school. Awww adorable.

Quin Somerville, ANOTHER child genius of a sort in zoology, is thrown in somewhat in “stash and run” manner where he appears in their lives as a young teenager and the he’s out. Peace son. See you in ten years when all hell breaks loose and you re-meet the little girl whose family took you in for a while and it basically becomes one of the more awkward things about the book. Ever.

War is starting to break out. Ooohh crap, did I mention that Ruth is the only one in her family who doesn’t look Jewish or anything like the rest of her family? Nope. She’s blonde, pale, and various other non-stereotypical Jewish characteristics inserted here. Her family sent her ahead to England as a student, but something sucks and then oh looky, Quin’s back and is getting an award. He’s peeved that Professor Berger isn’t there giving the award to him so he goes to the Berger house and finds Ruth, a whole bunch of stuff happens la-dee-dah (wouldn’t want to spoil the WHOLE book for you, but then after this review do you think you’ll read it?)

The only way to get her out of England is to get married. So they do. See the awkardness? On the train he tells her this morning gift story where a guy can marry a girl and then have the marriage annulled by giving her a morning gift. Basically it’s a way to get laid. Clever…. I wonder if it’s still used. Anyways, then they decide to keep a secret, her family has been worried sick so joy rings when she returns. Yay family reunion. Then she hides the marriage papers in the floorboards of her family’s now shitty apartment. 

Quin’s apparently loaded with cash. Too bad Ruth’s all “HEINI HEINI HEINI HEINI” (if you didn’t giggle at his name before when I mentioned it, giggle now). He’s apparently going to give away his house though. That blows. But he’s a professor at some college and he’s all about helping the refugees and gets his college and rich friends to take them in. Which is nice. Never said he wasn’t nice. Coincidentally Ruth is enrolled, not only in his college, but his CLASS. Oohhh crap another twist.

They’re both completely obsessed with avoiding each other, which as everyone knows is an action that is more obvious to people that there’s something going on. Anyways, Heini’s been in Thailand or something and he basically tells Ruth that he expects a piano (he’s INCREDIBLY selfish and self-centered in case you haven’t noticed) in their shitty, basically, 10x10 apartment. So she’s saving every penny from her waitressing job for that. Nothing says love like a piano.

And then… ANOTHER genius of some sorts name Verena Plackett whose dad runs the college and the mom is some kind of moral Nazi (hah more Nazis). I love how there's so many genius-ish people who showed their intelligence at really young ages so conviently together. The women in this family are basically gold digging title loving…. somethings. There’s an obvious competition to be first in the class between Verena and Ruth. Of course. And Verena is fighting to get into Quin’s pants. Silly girl. Can’t you see that Ruth is the one who fits in his pants? They have a field trip of some sort at Quin’s mansion and it’s basically my favorite part because it’s where everything really develops: the attractiveness of Ruth’s personality (similar to Countess), the growing sexual tension between Quin and Ruth, the little things that make you really want to keep reading and know what will happen. And then it goes downhill.

Heini’s finally there and he’s kind of bitter about the piano that Ruth bought him cause it’s like low quality. He’s only getting free room, food, etc from the Berger’s. He won’t even get a job because he has to be careful of his hands and those things are “demeaning.” UGH. Don’t even want to talk about him.

No wait. I do. He wants to have sex. Not because he loves her. No no. That would be you know… considerate of him. That would be… loving of him. Non-self-centered. He wants to have sex because ALL GREAT MUSICIANS HAVE SEX IN ORDER TO PLAY AWESOME. And since he has this great opportunity to be a pianist in America and has to win a competition to do so. Ruth being the stupid devoted girl that she is down for it, but then chickens out.

This is where the spoilers really begin. Actually it’s where my anger at the book truly begins. It’s where it goes downhill from here. Let’s plunge and hope we don’t drown.

Quin has always been treating Ruth like he doesn’t like her and there’s that slight sexual tension between the two, but definitely in a more fatherly figure more than anything. And then one night she runs to his apartment and blurts out the entire thing about not being able to have sex with Heini and he’s all peeved about it blah blah blah and her grades are suffering because of it. He listens. Then they have sex. That’s right. Sex. What. The. Fuck. It comes out of nowhere. I know that sex sometimes does, but really? After hearing about how she couldn’t have sex with the guy she’s engaged to, crying, and rambling about how she hates life etc etc, he’s like “Wow. The fact that you couldn’t have sex turns me on. The fact that your grades suck and you feel terrible turns me on. Sex solves all. Let’s do it.” After sex, they’re suddenly in love and all lovey dovey. 

Stupidly Quin then sends her a morning gift of emeralds, totally forgetting the story that he had told her. So she totally thinks that’s all it was to him, a one night stand and of course is depressed. Quin had been preparing an African expedition and apparently Verena thought he was going to take her, but when she confronts him, he’s like “You thought I was going to take YOU?!?” So this leads to during finals, Ruth gets up to go to the bathroom and Verena follows and for some unknown reason (as we later find out) she threatens her in the closet and is all “if you don’t leave I’ll tell everyone your relationship with Quin and that you had sex with him!” How the fuck would she know??? All he said was “I wasn’t going to take YOU.” Maybe along with being smart, she’s a psychic??

Ruth bails on her final exams and basically fails. Heini becomes some famous musician in America and she tells him the day of the voyage when they were going to leave together that she doesn't love him. Then she writes this letter to her parents that she's going to take time off for herself working as a nanny. And she's PREGNANT. But she never tells anyone! No, she just writes this letter with no return address to family and friends, but every freaking person somehow knows that she's PREGNANT how can they know if they haven't seen her or if she hasn't told them. Plus her new job is in the middle of nowhere. It ends with a happy reunion of Quin, her parents, and the newborn baby. Great.

It’s as though towards the end of the book she realizes “SHIT I want all this stuff to happen but it's like... at almost 350 pages and it's a 400 page book, better just cram all of it in no matter if it makes sense WHY.” If she had simply edited a lot of the beginning half of the book and then played out what would have developed in a better way, this book would have been great. It would have been sensational. It would not have been Countess, but it would have been a great follow up. I have a lot of anger (as you may have read in this review) because I had such high hopes for this book and it was a great plot, interesting characters, and a nice writing style, but really... no.