Rating: 2/5

Who am I kidding? I'm not going to finish this thing. I'll get more enjoyment by just staring at the cover lovingly, stroking it with the tippy tip-tops of my fingers, and saying aloud, 'Pretty!' in the voice of an idiot manchild. This isn't the case of a book deserving a good cover; this is the case of a cover deserving a good book... and this just ain't it.

I should have taken the author's name as sufficient warning. I mean, what the hell does an Adalbert Stifter have to tell me? He sounds like the kind of man who should do surveying for topographical maps or who should teach philology in Vienna while scowling at his students, who watch his old worldy muttonchops -- minute by minute, day by day, fortnight by fortnight -- devour his anemic, skull-like face. That's my impression of an Adalbert Stifter anyway.

Should I admit to you that this book is only seventy-five pages long? And that the typeface is relative large? And that the line spacing is generous? And yet I still couldn't bring myself to finish it?

I had the best of intentions. I would think to myself:

Okay. Now I am really, really, really going to sit down to read  Rock Crystal. Yes! I am very pysched about reading a bunch of scrupulous descriptions of the trees, the valleys, the mountains, the shrubs, the streams, the leaves, and the socioeconomic milieu of two Alpine valley communities circa the first half of the 1800s. Won't that be fun? I'm sooooo going to park my keister and enjoy the living shit out of this {allegedly} serene, moving yuletide story of two Hanselesque and Gretelish siblings who get lost in the woods on the way home from visiting their Grams and Gramps. Yes I am. I really am. I completely am. In two minutes I'm gonna go get that book and read the fuck out of it. I can't wait. It's gonna be, like, a totally transcendent experience. Or something. I am having so much fun thinking about all the fun I'm going to have reading about the father's shoemaking business and why the townspeople prefer his shoes to anyone else's. Even Aldo's. Yes. Any minute now I am going find myself so tempted by this beguiling, charming tale of two lost imps that I'll desperately crave a hasty return to those Bohemian villiages. In fact, I'll never want the story to end. Ever! I mean, look at the cover... It's so icy and pretty. It's reminds me of Marlon Brando's crystalline tract home on Krypton in the first Superman movie. Or an Apple store. Something clean, crisp, cool, refreshing. Like a glass of Perrier with a so-thin-you-can-read-through-it slice of cucumber in it. That's what this book is like. And that's why I can't wait to get back to it. I don't even care if I have those two new DVDs waiting to be watched. They're probably not good anyway, right? They're surely not about a pair of Lederhosen-wearing scamps yodeling their way through the Alps on a heartwarming Christmastime trek. What could be better, really? Books like this lift me up to a higher plateau of consciousness. The penthouse of consciousness, you might say. Ten more minutes, and then holy shit... am I ever going to read the fucking fuckety fuck out of that book! I am very, very, very, very excited. Whoohoo! (I wonder if The Biggest Loser is on...)

So -- SPOILER AHEAD -- the kids get lost but, unfortunately, they don't die. (I read the introduction. That's how I know.) Death would have really added something to this novel, I think. Violent death? Even better. This thing was just way too prim, starchy, and antiseptic. I imagined the author wearing a pince-nez and long gloves and using a cigarette holder while he wrote it. It's almost as if a dewy-eyed Hegel (in secret) tried his hand at novel-writing and the manuscript were found long after his death by... I don't know, Susan Sontag or someone who wrote their jacket blurb before they had even bothered to read the damn thing.