Rating: 4/5

Previously reviewed on The Good, The Bad, and The Unread:

I’ve been enjoying this reissued trilogy very much and was looking forward to seeing how the series would conclude, whether we would get to revisit any of the characters from previous instalments. This book takes place somewhat later than the others, in 1859 – so the Victorian rather than the Regency era – but we do see Fanny from the middle book once again. Now widowed for a second time, Fanny is able to offer help and advice to this book’s heroine on her return to England, but the beginning of this book finds us once more overseas, this time initially in Belgium.

Ellen Paget teaches at the school for young ladies in Brussels where she herself was educated. A great favourite with her pupils, she is less popular with the headmistress due to the interest shown to her by an older male teacher. When scandal threatens, Ellen is whisked away to Paris by the headmistress’ friend in order to be a steadying influence to the friend’s niece and governess to the alternately spoiled and neglected daughter of the household. On arriving in Paris, Ellen finds her new home in disarray; her charge wants nothing to do with her and is ignored by her own mother, who wants only to entertain her artistic friends, while the little girl’s father is a degenerate gambler, who throws wild parties – when he actually comes home – and who keeps his daughter up late to entertain him and his equally wild friends.

Ellen does her best to rectify the situation and manages to befriend the impoverished writer who is closest to her charge’s mother. Unfortunately Ellen is unable to avert the oncoming tragedy resulting from the turbulent marriage of her employers and is forced to return to England and the Hermitage – the setting for the previous books in this series. Once there, she discovers her own family to be in disarray – as well as under threat from the machinations of her father’s new housekeeper. Ellen’s two married sisters are keen to enlist her help in ensuring that the housekeeper does not deprive them of the inheritance from their mother to which they believe themselves entitled; although they are not particularly likable, the reader has to have some sympathy for them, since the housekeeper is quite clearly a wrong-un too.

Fortunately Ellen does have some true allies amongst the various people keen to enlist her support for their various schemes and plans. As well as Great Aunt Fanny, there is Benedict Masham – a far more eligible potential suitor than any of the men Ellen is pursued by in Brussels and Paris. This book is complex with a whole series of plots to follow, as well as a vast cast of characters. On the whole, however, it holds together well, and provides a fitting conclusion to the series.