Rating: 3/5

It was the best of blondes -- it was the worst of blondes.

I was never a big SEX AND THE CITY fan. As a rule I prefer romance to chick lit. I like guaranteed happy endings, and I also prefer a more hopeful take on men than what you get from most literary or "feminist" fiction. 

The point is, I approached 4 BLONDES with really low expectations. Yet it wasn't quite as bad as I expected. Some of the satire on career women and feminists is razor sharp. Bushnell really shows how "educated" white women from schools like Barnard and Wellesley sneer at minorities while aping their victim rhetoric. They use the language of victims while fighting not for equality but for the privileges of white male aristocrats. (One part where the "smart" heroine is shocked because on AMAZON anyone can trash a book by an "important" feminist author left me smiling for days.)

On the other hand, as irreverent and clear-sighted as Candace Bushnell can be about important things, there's also a certain amount of silliness and snobbery that seems to come directly from the author, not the characters. For example, there's a whole story about a fashion model with no work skills and no formal education at all who is "shocked" that her equally brainless baby sister would marry a rock star -- because supposedly rock stars are "beneath" jet-set fashion models. The problem is, Bushnell knows nothing about rock and roll, indeed nothing about music, and never allows "Digger" to speak for himself. In real life, a tough boy like Jim Morrison or Eminem would have ripped Jane's lungs out -- even a drippy mama's boy like Elvis Presley or Kurt Cobain would have managed a put down or two. Yet in this book the rock star and his just-off-the-farm parents are supposed to be "terrified" of their brittle, artificial jet-set mother-in-law. 

As my Depression-raised, Harlem-born grandfather used to say, "aw, who's gonna believe this?" 

Put Ma Joad up against Lily Bart in a fist fight (or even just a catfight) and it's not Ma Joad who's going to the hospital. 

When she wants to be, Candace Bushnell can be one smart cookie. But the rest of the time she's just a product whore pain in the ass.