Rating: 3/5

Gabe is a whiny little brat. His cousin Sari is a know-it-all who enjoys watching Gabe suffer. Both of these unlikable characters are in Egypt - Gabe is on vacation and Sari lives there with her dad, Ben the archeologist.

At first, Gabe is really excited to spend time with his cool Uncle Ben. He loves the idea of exploring a new tomb and takes great delight in telling Sari exactly how mummies are made - in gruesome detail.

But then things get a little strange. The Egyptian man - Ahmed - who works for Ben, is convinced that there is a curse on the tomb. And then some of Ben's workers start to get sick. And some vanish permanently.

Is there really a curse on the mummy's tomb? Or is another sinister thing entirely taking place?

Stine really pulled no stops with making his two main characters unlikeable. A bold choice, but I was annoyed with them. Both are petty, selfish, whiny, and stuck-up. I mean, I didn't want anything bad to happen to either of them, but I didn't enjoy spending time with them either.

I liked Stine's twist on the traditional mummy tale.  There is no 'real' curse. Ahmed is a devotee of the Priestess Khala. He and all his ancestors have been keep her 'curse' on the tomb alive by turning any violators of the chamber into mummies - while still alive! *shiver When Gabe finds the hidden chamber stuffed full of mummies, Sari quickly follows. But then Ahmed shows up to kill them. Ben comes down, and no one is able to fight Ahmed off because he has a dagger, a torch and he's insane. I think Ben should have made more of an effort (especially considering that the kids are there, but oh well. The nice twist at the end is that it turns out that the tiny mummy hand that Gabe bought at a garage sale in the States for a buck is really the true mummified hand of the Priestess Khala. Gabe ends up using it to raise the mummies in the chamber from the dead and they come to his aid. So there are living mummies after all! 

Some of the horror in this book comes from real-life fears such as child-kidnapping. There is an anxiety-producing scene where Gabe and Sari are led away by someone they trust who uses the claim, "Your father sent me," to lure them into a vehicle. The children eventually realize they're being driven away from the hotel and make their escape, but this plotline hits a little too close to home for me. Very scary.

The book is also filled with tons of gross smells. And bugs. Hundreds of scorpions and other creepy crawlies that crawl into pant legs and do other gross things. This book has a high "gross-out" factor.

My edition of this book has a wonderful "Behind the Scenes" section in the back. This includes a Q&amp;A with Stine, a list of Top 10 Weirdest Things Found in a Mummy's Tomb, A History of Hieroglyphics, and a section on Preserving the Dead. Fascinating for children. They even provide a hieroglyphic alphabet so you can learn to write your name in hieroglyphics! Very inaccurately, but a cool concept and one kids will love.

First sentence: I saw the Great Pyramid and got thirsty. - I liked this opening, but Gabe quickly (I mean on the first half-page) establishes himself to be a brat of epic proportions. And he never improves. Neither does Sari. Still, it's not like I read Stine for character development. *rolls eyes 

Last sentence:  I'll bet they were surprised at how glad I was to see them. 

La maldición de la momia - ¿Qué despertará a los muertos?