Rating: 4/5

Holy Bejesus, Tomato Red is good. 

Daniel Woodrell, the guy who wrote Winter's Bone, is moving up my “favorite writer” charts. I've read two of his books and hope he's published 100 more. I'm salivating at the prospect.

Tomato Red reads like Jim Thompson in the Ozarks but with Woodrell's superhuman tag-team of spellbinding language and cutting psychological insight. The story centers on Sammy Barlach, a well-intentioned loser who meets Jam and Jason Merridew while sleeping off a bender in a house he was burgling until he fell asleep. Sammy doesn't fit anywhere, has no people, and doesn't expect much from the world. Jam is a teenage girl obsessed with escaping the sunbleached trailer park hell of West Table, Missouri. Jason is the best looking guy in the county. The town's unwritten hegemony binds the three and places them in a position where gaining momentary self-respect requires a lashing out with spectacularly tragic consequences. 

Tomato Red proceeds from Sammy's internal dialogue. He figures out the best decision, when Jam invites him to hang out with the Merridews, is to head “the other way from you”, but when Jam says Sammy can “share the stink”, he sticks around because, as he puts it, “I always have just wanted to fit in somewhere, and this is the bunch that would have me.” Sammy functions as a wary, almost impassive observer, cognizant in an unspoken way of the “shit hits fan” inevitability. And he seems to watch his surroundings closely because they might the closest he might ever come to a calm, safe place. Until they're not. And when everything falls apart I felt a cleaved sense of “how the fuck did that happen?” and “how the fuck would that not happen?” Woodrell's taut, wiry novel runs a perfect 225 pages, not a wasted word among them.

A couple weeks back Anthony Bourdain featured Woodrell on the No Reservations “Ozarks” episode. Within two minutes Bourdain admits that Woodrell's presence in the Ozarks is the primary reason for the episode's existence. He wanted to meet Woodrell and manipulated the making of a television show to meet that goal. I get it, Mr. Bourdain. I'm right with you. I can't explain how Daniel Woodrell became a writer, and from where his gifts fell from the sky, but he's a manifestation of great American fiction from a blank spot on most readers' mental maps that's fortunate to claim a living storyteller of this caliber. His back catalog is calling me. Both Tomato Red and Daniel Woodrell are the real deal.