Rating: 3/5

This has all the bells and whistles that come with classic Gothic horror, but it lacks depth.
Every single character (even the MC who is based on a real historical figure) felt like a cardboard cut out. I'm amazed The hero is such a dude, and you will be wondering what the appeal is. For example, Byron can walk down a street with all the women throwing themselves at him, and he hasn't even made eye contact. He thinks a lot of himself, does a lot for himself, has a lot of naughty fun but he's quite stupid and boring, overall. You will very much be under the impression that absolutely every man, woman and goat in the vicinity can't resist him, though. 
This book was incredibly hard to rate because it is clever, it is evidently well-researched and the world building was excellent in parts, but it felt so shallow. I will say that the chapters featuring The Shelleys were more interesting, but overall, it was cramming a lot into a small space. 
This novel was structured much in the same way as Rice's Interview With The Vampire but the huge difference there is how we bond with Louis as a character. I did not care enough about any of these characters as they lacked depth. Even Lestat the villain is more interesting and appealing than any of these characters in this book. Bear with me while I try and explain my thoughts, because they're complicated: 
When he meets a vampire in Greece, Byron is seduced and desires the world's knowledge. The Pasha who promises him this knowledge also wants him as his companion for eternity, and Byron is into it.
I do wish Byron had also checked to see if with becoming a vampire he would also gain a bit of common sense, as that was definitely something he lacked. There is a scene where after living in the Pasha's Gothic mountain castle for a few days and seeing all there is to see about the undead and what they get up to, Byron still can't put two and two together when he visits the peasants in the nearby village and thinks they're looking a bit pale, acting strange and showing more interest in his cut palm than the coin he is trying to bribe them with. He just can't work it out. There's something fishy going on but he can't say for sure. His horse is nervous around these pointy-toothed anaemics (who weren't this pale when he saw them last week?? What happened there?) but no, Byron is still waiting for them to sit down and have a chat with him about things.
There are some elements of this book that read like an action-packed video game where the hero gets all the girls, any time and anywhere he wants, but there are some excellent descriptions of scenery, too. 
I thought the entire legend about the vurdulaucha, the local suspicions and the idea of the Vampire king being a Pasha (the turks were oppressing the Greeks at this time) was excellent. The mointainside castle with a passageway into the underworld was also fantastic. I really loved that, and the legend of Lilith. This is why this book was hard to rate, because most of everything else is not that good.
I learned recently that Tom Holland did eventually quit writing fiction and moved on to writing history books instead. He is an excellent historian. The historian was alive and well in this book, but we needed the storyteller.
There are elements of this book that feel forced, and a lot of relationships between characters appeared seemingly out of nowhere, to the point where I'd have to go back a few pages and make sure I hadn't simply missed an in-depth conversation in the rose garden between Byron and this new female character he loves so much that they're actually getting married. I hadn't missed anything, things just moved very quickly. 
In the blurb it's very much about Byron being lured by this mysterious, beautiful Greek slave. His love for her brings him into the Pasha's claws and he has to try and save her. That is very much part of the book but the amount of time he spends forgetting about her is impressive—it's up there with Worf failing to remember his wife in the last episode of Star Trek DS9.
I wasn't convinced that our man was capable of love, and then when it turns out everything he does is for love, I was confused to say the least. Don't get me wrong, everything was finally tied together at the end but you might find yourself sitting there thinking, 'Oh... I see' when it is all explained to you in one final passage. You will see how it is that way, but you won't feel it's particularly convincing. Then you'll have a few questions about the vast differences between female and male vampire anatomy and reproductive properties. 
The language is a bit flat at times, and not once did I feel that Byron genuinely reflected on anything, or felt for anyone other than himself. Even when it comes to companionship as a vampire, he's not looking for a soul mate, he's just trying to prevent future loneliness and boredom. Funny how that doesn't change in 200 years. 
The tie-in of his actual life with the events in the book was really clever—a sign of good historical fiction—but so much happens and everyone speaks the same way, about the same things etc. A lot of looking into eyes and looking away in fear, but looking again with lust etc. 
Rebecca as the interviewer was also incredibly uninteresting. The format worked, but she wasn't a likeable character, nor did I particularly care if anything did or didn't happen to her.
This book did a lot of explaining, but as a vampire romp with some interesting history, I did not hate it.
I still recommend this book, despite my bipolar review.