Rating: 1/5

This is a book that I definitely picked up on the cover alone. That, and I like the sound of the title; when I play RPGs I tend to gravitate towards some kind of melee-and-magic combo, so this sounded like my kind of fantasy. It was only when I was twenty pages away from the end of the novel — and profoundly bored and dissatisfied — than I learned that Marion Zimmer Bradley is one of the most well-regarded and influential speculative fiction authors of the past century. 

At least, she was well-regarded, until it came out that she was sexually abusive to her daughter, and assisted her husband in his own sex crimes. 

It's hard to divorce that from how I feel about the novel, not only because of how heinous that is, but because one of the main problems I had with this book is the gross sexual politics. I'm used to a certain amount of sexism and weird social mores in older fiction, but I already found the amount of infantilization of the love interests, the paternalism of the leading men towards them, the deeply ingrained misogyny reflected in this world and how the female characters were treated, incredibly off-putting. Knowing the author's crimes makes it even more repugnant, none of it was accidental.

Even beyond that, it's incredible how little actually happens here. The entire plot could be summed in a paragraph, or a particularly long sentence. Once all three of the main characters get together, the rest of the novel is repeating to each the rules this universe has for psychic stuff, what they need to do to rescue the damsel in distress, and it's not until the last twenty or so pages that the rescue actually happens. I'm all for worldbuilding, but when that consists of really ugly characters standing around reiterating things the reader has already heard explained through internal monologue, it gets really old really fast. 

If I have anything nice to say, it's that the bones of this world are actually kind of interesting. The planet of this series is basically reflective of medieval Europe (in a way that I suspect I'd find racist if I continued to read these, which I won't), with the added twist of special jewels that allow for psychic abilities. The way those psychic powers are portrayed are interesting, and one can imagine the possibilities that the constraints on them allow for. Shame they amount to so little, and that the horrid unpleasantness runs throughout the book.

I actually really enjoy the fantasy of planetary romance, but I'm getting very tired of reading through this stuff and having to remind myself that the kinds of dweebs who would write stuff like this fifty or a hundred years ago are not going to reflect my own modern sense of morality. This is a particularly egregious example, as the author is a confirmed monster, but my God I would love to find a story like this that doesn't make my skin crawl.