Rating: 2/5

The Noisy Village series (well actually, the German language translation of Astrid Lindgren's original Swedish text, and where the hamlet is known as Bullerbü) was one of my absolute favourites when I was a little girl (I must have read all three books at least ten times, and that is a conservative estimate). At that age (from about age six to age nine or ten) I just felt and knew on a purely emotional and personal level that I absolutely adored the sweet and enchanting episodical nuggets of carefree childhood in a turn of the century Swedish village (actually, even less than that, but really just three interconnected farms). Now, after recently rereading (and again in German) for the first time in decades, I can truly appreciate and understand both emotionally and academically, stylistically, how simply wonderful the first-person narrative of seven year old Lisa really is. Astrid Lindgren has so perfectly captured the innocent, but also astute voice of an imaginative and observant child (Lisa shines, and from her, emanates a magic that makes everything in Bullerbü sparkle with sweetness and light).

With such a glowing preamble, why then only two stars for this English language translation, for The Children of Noisy Village? It has NOTHING to do with the story, with the general themes presented, and EVERYTHING to do with Florence Lamborn's woefully inadequate translation, or rather what has been changed and is missing in said translation. Not only are the episodes themselves arranged rather haphazardly, there are anecdotes in the first book (in this book, in this translation) that in the German editions I read (and likely also in the Swedish originals, but that is speculation on my part) appear in books two and three. But even MORE of an issue is the fact that there are numerous chapters which do not appear at all, which have seemingly been entirely omitted (expunged) by the translator. And that, at least for me, is not only flabbergasting but also totally unacceptable, and for me, a massive insult to both Astrid Lindgren and her legacy as an author. And thus, I firmly believe that it is high time for a new English language translation of the Noisy Village series, namely one that keeps to the original, and does not arbitrarily omit entire chapters!