Rating: 3/5

I read an English translation of this play some time back (https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...). It is a good, but old-fashioned, translation, but the only one I could find. I have a professional interest in the play, so I thought I’d read it in the original German using this student edition. 

This play is better approached as an operatic tale full of sweeping sentiment, wrought language and swelling song. For at its core it is a simple fairy tale or a magical folk tale – an ambitious young man is lured from a pastoral, rural paradise to find adventure and opportunity in the big city only to realize that all this striving and struggling makes him miserable, and he barely escapes to find happiness in the peaceful beauty of the mountains. 

Like a fairy tale, the characters are more types than individuals. There is more gesture than action, more formula than plot. Like an antique musical box with moving figurines that dance to the music, one should enjoy it for its grace, beauty and spectacle. 

In thought, the play is thoroughly old fashioned and sentimental. I don’t think the play is to supposed to have a social message. It is very much about hearth and home. But the 21st century reader can’t help but notice that the natural order of things is not to be challenged or questioned. To seek to be more than you are is to risk disaster. The play is anti-revolutionary. It should be noted that the slave in the play is full of ambition and striving and dreams, while the slave owner is content with the existing, sleepy order of things. 

The modern audience may find itself rooting for Rustan’s success (I did) despite Grillparzer’s best efforts to present him as awful as possible without irrevocably staining him as a pariah. I was hoping for Rustan’s success primarily because the King is such an odious being. Vacillating, cowardly, trivial, untrusting, untrustworthy, moody -- he makes Rustan’s deadly ambition and moral waverings seem positively heroic. But don’t gets your hope up for Rustan to succeed, Grillparzer throws every obstacle at him, no matter how impossibly improbable and coincidental. (It is a fairy tale after all.) 

Modern people like to root for the upstart and the ambitious, especially when the old order seems corrupt and fossilized. But one needs to understand that, in 1830, glorifying the overthrow of kings would be detrimental to one’s long term employment, and perhaps even breathing. Ambition to be more than you are or were born is a very modern (somewhat American) concept. 

This student edition is helpful. It provides a very good literary guide, with an extensive introduction and footnotes (all in English). Yates provides a guide to reading the German original, plus explanations of obscure allusions. 

This is not a play I’d highly recommend unless you are interested in German drama history. I think Grillparzer has better plays like Sappho.