Rating: 5/5

#2016-usa-geography-challenge: INDIANA
#2016-aty-reading-challenge--week-15: a book set in the past (100 years ago)

I seem to have an affinity for novels about women's lives set in the past century. Perhaps it is because they give me glimpses about what my grandmother's and mother's lives might have been like. Some of my favorites include So Big and A Tree Grows in Brooklyn. 

The Stone Diaries now takes its place among these favorites. It is written as part autobiography/part biography by an omniscient narrator, about the life and times of Daisy Goodwill Flett, who was born in 1905 and died in 199_. "Biography, even autobiography, is full of systemic error, of holes that connect like a tangle of underground streams." And this telling of Daisy's life as daughter, wife, mother, is full of holes, gaps in the narrative, letters that present only one side, etc. And these holes perhaps represent the huge, gaping hole in Daisy's life that should have been filled with her mother's love. 

For Daisy's mother, Mercy Stone Goodwill, died giving birth to Daisy. She was such an obese woman that she didn't even realize she was pregnant. And poor baby Daisy was laid on a cold stone table, alone in the world for her first breaths. "Remember this poor child is motherless, and there's not one thing worse in this world than being motherless." Her father is too distraught over the loss of his beloved wife to care for the infant so Daisy is raised by the neighbor lady, Clarentine, who abruptly deserts her husband and moves to Winnipeg to live with her son, Barker, a professor. Daisy stays with them until Clarentine's death when Daisy is eleven. Her father, a virtual stranger, finally takes charge of her then and they move to Indiana to start a new life together.

"And the question arises: what is the story of a life? A chronicle of fact or a skillfully wrought impression? The bringing together of what she fears? Or the adding up of what has been off-handedly revealed, those tiny allotted increments of knowledge?" This novel does a masterly job of revealing all through bits and pieces, through impressions.

Shields' writing can be blunt, sometimes funny, often poignant: "Nor, though she knew she had been loved in her life, did she ever hear the words 'I love you, Daisy' uttered aloud (such a simple phrase), and only during the long, thin, uneventful sleep that preceded her death did she have the wit (and leisure) to ponder the injustice of this." My kind of book!