Rating: 5/5

A breathtaking book that offers richly impressionistic visions of Walcott's Caribbean across the span of a history defined by colonialism and its aftermath, and wild and varying mixture of ethnic cultures and traditions. Few in recent decades have wielded English with such inspired precision as Derek Walcott, and he is at the height of his powers here.
There is much here in terms of allusion and imagery for the academically inclined to feast on, but this is not work written solely for university classrooms to savour. Indeed, the casual poetry-loving reader will find eminent joy among these pages. Walcott writes for himself and for the world.
'The Star-Apple Kingdom' consists of ten poems, ranging from two- or three-page offerings to a dense twelve-page closer (the collection's title poem), and all are, in their way, exceptional. This is where you'll find some of his most acclaimed writing, such as “The Sea Is History”, rich in Biblical allusion, which considers the interaction between humankind and nature, weighs the passage of time, and seeks, in its way, to make some sense of identity as a notion (Where are your monuments, your battles, martyrs? / Where is your tribal memory? Sirs, / in that grey vault. The sea. The sea / has locked them up. The sea is History.). Or “R.T.S.L.”, an elegy to mark the passing of his dear friend, Robert Lowell (there was the startle of wings / breaking from the closing cage / of your body, your fist unclenching / these pigeons circling serenely / over the page…).
But rather than run through each poem in turn, I'll focus on one particular poem, the first of the collection, in order to give a taste of the kind of flavours on offer here.
Because Walcott hits his stride right from the start, with “The Schooner Flight”:

In idle August, while the sea soft,
and leaves of brown islands stick to the rim
of this Caribbean, I blow out the light
by the dreamless face of Maria Concepcion
to ship as a seaman on the schooner Flight.

From these vivid opening lines unfurl a long, magnificent poem, narrated as an inner monologue by the sailor, Shabine, a devoted poet, (self-described, in language harsh and beautiful: “I’m just a red nigger who love the sea, / I had a sound colonial education, / I have Dutch, nigger, and English in me, / and either I’m nobody, or I’m a nation...”) and building, across several pages, a small epic story, slipping in and out of the surreal, of one man's life, of culture, tradition and the unbreakable power of love, of an island man's natural inseparability from the sea, and of the very Caribbean itself. The music of the voice is truly eloquent here, and the imagery and similes heartbreaking in their imagination. Take these lines, plucked at random, from the section just inches from the end:

But things must fall, and so it always was,
on one hand Venus, on the other Mars;
fall, and are one, just as this earth is one
island in archipelagoes of stars.
My first friend was the sea. Now, is my last.

“The Schooner Flight” is not only one of Walcott's greatest creations but, in my very humble opinion, one of the finest in recent decades, and if the book were to consist of nothing more than this poem 'The Star-Apple Kingdom' would still be a towering achievement.