Rating: 4/5

Nice to find this site for a "review"
I read Pooh (first my grandma read me the Dutch translation when I was a kid - long before Disney turned it into a cocacola red carricature - then I read that myself again, then later learning English I got the original Pooh. 

When I found Pooh and the Philosophers, I picked it up after glancing through only a few pages, and I never regret reading it. 
Yes, the style is worthy of Pooh itself: lots of tongue-in-cheek passages, and never ever it will be clear for the reader whether this is "an introduction to philosophy" or a mockery of it. 
It's a great tribute to The Bear, though and to Milne. 
 
Sometimes the book seems to go in circles ( but that's the literary equivalent of the search for the heffalump, isn't it ? ) 
Then I applied Socrates' seave : 
1 is this "true" ? 
2 If not (entirely) true: Does it make me happy ? 
3 If not entirely true AND it doesn't bring happiness: do I NEED to know - for safety, protection ... ?

To the TRUTH : 
As it is presented as non-fiction: it probably is half true. It's both a text on philosophy and a story about philosophy. The two sources are linked. 
They interfere and as always interference of waves with (almost) equal wavelengths, a beautiful but complex pattern appears. 
I like to admire the beautiful and complex pattern, then follow The Bear in exploring it. 
Admiration is soo much more fulfilling than mere "mentally understanding", though that has beauty in it as well. 

So it is probably partly "un-true", but there's enough truth in the book to go on. 

2 Even if there is a partial un-truth : this book CAN make me happy. 
It references the good stuff of being, of remembering childhood, of remembering what boring adults call 'innocence": if you do not KNOW the easy ways of grown-up life, you need to TRY to do things, the difficult way (Eyore's house, the search for the Pole). Linking that attitude to scientific / philosophical "experimantal methods" is hilarious, and such a wonderful view on how to encourage the ways of science in daily life. 
Pooh as an example !

3 Now do I NEED to know ? 
For Socrates, when question 1 was answered yes, 2 and 3 weren't necessary. 
Here we see 1 is answered with "more than half full", and 2 with "definately full, so bottoms-up"

So 3: yes, you need to know there is a full glass to enjoy the bottoms-up. 

Enjoy the book

I expected to find some reviews that would say it was too long. Or that this is "not a good book on real philosophy"
But I find the other ones as well, echoing my idea that the "tongue in cheek" stance matches both pooh/Milne AND the general science that philosophy is. 

I am not a formally trained philosopher, didn't go beyond the big principles of the Philosophiae Naturalis. Newtons text is old and not an easy read, but hey it helped bringing people to the moon. 
We do need "philosophy" in our dayly life, and if we can do so lauching