Rating: 2/5

This book was listed in the bibliography in the back of one of the short story collections I read not too long ago. Those stories were about dogs and naturally every title in the bibliography was also about dogs. I copied down a few to explore and ultimately chose this and one other to read. 

I had mixed reactions to this book. The writing is mainly quite lovely, but I did get a little bored with the extremely detailed descriptions of the 'hunting-grounds'. Sorry for that, but I just could not make myself do more than skim through that part. 

Mann describes his dog perfectly, so that it was very easy to 'see' him, and to understand that there were certain evidences that proved he was not a purebred German short-haired pointer but that Mann did not care about that. Basically, his children had fallen in love with pup Bashan the moment they saw him and they were the driving force behind the acquisition of the dog. 

But as so often happens, dogs pick their own masters, and Bashan chose the author as his god. To such an extent that if he had been my dog I would have been completely annoyed at his fawning, needy demand for attention. I like a dog to be a companion but not a leech. Any dog acting like Bashan would drive me crazy, but the author accepted it all as the rightful due to a Man from a Hunting Dog. 

The first two chapters delighted me, but chapter three was somewhat depressing, especially when Mann compares how differently Bashan and his former dog Percy (a purebred collie) reacted to the whippings they each had been given.
 
"Percy would grit his teeth and keep mum. He feared the rawhide whip just as Bashan fears it, and unfortunately he got a taste of it oftener than Bashan; for, first of all, I was younger and more hot-tempered during his epoch than I am at present, and secondly, his heedlessness often assumed a wanton and sinister aspect which simply clamoured for chastisement and urged me to it. When, driven to extremities, I would take down the whip from the nail, then, it is true, he would crawl under the table or bench and make himself small, but never a howl passed his lips when the blow, and perhaps yet another, came humming down upon his back; at most he gave a low moan, in case the whip bit too hard. But Bully Bashan begins to shriek and whimper when I merely raise my arm. In short, he is without pride or dignity, without self-restraint or self-discipline. But his activities seldom call for armed punitive intervention—the less so since I have long ago ceased to demand achievements from him which are contrary to his nature and insistence upon which might lead to a collision."

Bashan was lucky he did not enter his god's life in earlier years. He might not have survived long enough for Mann to write about him.

Once I got turned off this way it was hard to get interested in the rest of the story, and I must admit I was not all that impressed by it overall. I had too much trouble ridding my brain of that image of Mann raising his arm and Bashan screaming in fear. Haven't quite managed that yet, as a matter of fact.