Rating: 4/5

I recently finished a course on Coursera on Medical Neuroscience. It was an extremely difficult course for me because I really don't have a science background. On the other hand, it was fascinating. I took it because for a long time I've had an interest in books concerning the brain and its workings, most commonly Oliver Sacks. Now I'm finding that the course has made a difference in my appreciation of this type of book.

Prion diseases are not entirely new, but the name is. Prions are not a virus, they are not bacteria, they cause no inflammation or fever, cannot be controlled by precautionary tactics but appear to be passed along only by direct contact, although not simply touching a surface or infected person. They appear to be twisted proteins which are reproduced by a cell's DNA once the mutation has occurred. No one knows for sure. 

Prions were the reason for the "Mad Cow Disease" plague that rampaged Britain in the 1990s. They were also what caused kuru in a primitive tribe in New Guinea. They cause scrapie in sheep. They are what causes Jacob-Creutzfield disease also. The first 2 were discovered to be the results of "cannibalism': in the case of kuru, direct human cannibalism; in the second, the result of using animal remains to create bone meal supplements for cattle feed.

No one knows how they get started; the theory is that a mutation occurs, the proteins get reproduced and cause the disease. The passage of the disease is known. 

They cause huge holes in the cerebellum and plaques of astrogliosis and amyloidosis. They inevitably cause death in the animals they infect and the humans. There is no cure.

Now, how does my class fit into this? Because I now know how the proteins are produced and multiplied, I know what astrogliosis and amyloidosis are and how they occur. I understand why there is no cure. And this has increased my appreciation. (Not that everyone interested in this type of book should take a class in neuroscience.) 

Whether or not you have neuroscience knowledge, anyone interested in medicine will find this book fascinating. In spite of the fact that there is no cure and that this type of disease is an awful way to die, the discovery of what happens in the disease process and of what causes it is extremely interesting. And Rhodes, also known for his book The Making of the Atomic Bomb is an excellent writer.

If you love medical books, but this one on your For Sure reading list.