Rating: 4/5

The American artist Roy Lichtenstein, 1923-1997, is considered one of the fathers of the Pop Art movement. From High to Low art and anti-art, Lichtenstein made began his impact on the art world as the Abstract Expressionists suddenly started to fall from favor.

This brief but rich book covers both biographic and art history related to Roy Lichtenstein. Venturing into the realm of the academic without becoming verbose it remains readable to most readers with some background in modern art, art history, or the like. 

Six chapters or sections include;  The Beginnings, The Pictures that Lichtenstein Made Famous or The Pictures that Made Lichtenstein Famous, A Closer Look at Benday Dots, Lichtenstein Looks at Art, Sidestepping Abstraction, Compilations, Syncopations, Discombobulations followed by and closing the book Roy Lichtenstein: A Chronology. Organized to be readable as well as informative and providing not a small amount of referential emphasis, the book in less than a 100 pages covers the artist as thoroughly as anything this compact. The book is rich with formal catalog style analysis/commentary of more than 85 illustrations blended in with the text and history of Lichtenstein. The chronology contains an additional 10 photographs of the author from various stages in his life.

With economic but effective description and analysis this author gives us a different Roy Lichtenstein than many other writers or critics have. R.L. was a commentator on art with his art like Picasso before him (who incidentally he sent up with his own 'Cubist' works) and not just a commercial artist who copied and resized the work of others. Author Hendrickson goes to the works of R.L. to show that critics and other writers miss that R.L. didn't just copy. His works alter and play on previous ones in subtle and very sophisticated ways. From color to perspective alteration, the stripped down works of R.L stand very clearly on their own. Even the extreme realism of Trompe-l'œil gets the Lichtenstein treatment. He, the artist, even beat Warhol to the game of painting the comics. 

An entire section of this book A Closer Look at Benday Dots is a must read for students and connoisseurs of Lichtenstein. The history of the half tone technique that R.L. incorporated as a reference point in his works is fundamental to the complete understanding of Lichtenstein. Other Pop Artists, notably Warhol, were envious of this inclusion by R.L. and further envious with the seeming ease he used commercial printing techniques in his work. Author Hendrickson expands greatly on the general assumptions and corrects some fallacies that persist about this tool in the artists repertoire.

The weakest points of this work are its brevity and size. An artist whose work is large, larger, and gigantic is not well served by this physically small volume. While the work is rich, in places terse to the point of obscurity, another dozen pages could put this over the top. As it is, it remains a great starting point for any Pop art viewer. 

This book ends with Lichtensteins place in modern art. His contradictions never may have been resolved, but what better endnote for a painter who turned a brush stroke in to art itself?