Rating: 4/5

So good. I was telling someone I was reading a collection of memoir/short stories by Alice Walker somewhere between nonfiction and fiction. They responded it would be incredibly hard for them to read this because they couldn't tell what was real. I love that I couldn't tell because it's part of what a broken heart is - the bending of reality to try to return to some state of balance and grace. Navigating through the dark spaces and ugly truths that what was and is no more are intricately connected and will never stop changing the rest of your life. This includes all of the beautiful moments, not just the ugly ones. 

Walker breaks the book into a series of sections, sometimes with individual chapters within the sections. Some sections feel like fictionalized memoir barely removed from the reality that was. Others, not so much. Some of the stories feel borrowed and all of them are getting at our connections - both how they build and tear us apart. 

To My Young Husband

"Maybe the love is there because of shared suffering? Maybe it rises up wherever we perceive that another human has survived. As human." I paused in reading a memoir/short story about Alice Walker's married life and divorce thinking if I just waited a few minutes I could hold back the tears. "Nowadays, when everywhere you look there is so much tragedy, so much sadness, whenever I am about to hear more of it, I scrutinize the person or persons who are about to speak. I am looking to see if they are still beautiful, regardless of the tale they are about to tell. And if they are still beautiful, before they say anything, I tell them they are. This is because Greatness of Beauty is how I see God. God being the common name given by many people to that which is undeniably unsurpassable, obvious and true." At this point, I had to put the book away so I wouldn't be a blotchy, crying mess in public. 

For most of the story, they're married and living in Mississippi - an inter-racial couple with a small daughter during the civil rights movement. A lot of it is flashback trying to remember, mourn and capture all the love that once existed. "And that is why I am thinking of you, and reminding you of a moment in which we, unlikely us, shared a vision and reality of love, that need not be completely lost. If North America survives, it will not look like or be like it is today. One day there will be, created out of all of us lovers, an American race - remember how Jean Toomer, whom we sometimes read to each other, in Mississippi, was already talking about this American race, even in the Thirties? We will simply not let the writers of history claim we did not exist. Why should the killers of the world be "the future" and not us?" 

The flashback sequences are connected to a family therapy session decades after the divorce where the daughter is trying to understand if there was ever love between her parents. Our narrator realizes she's never given herself the needed space to mourn the passing of the marriage/relationship/love that existed and takes time to meditate in this necessary space while sharing it with her daughter. It's obvious the love never vanished entirely, it was just too hurt to be expressive, even after all the years. 

Orelia and John 

A short about a couple navigating how relationships change over time and what it means to continue loving one another. 

There Was a River

Navigating how one decides to leave and how complicated it is to see what the relationship actually was. I think this was a bit too close to home and I'll need to come back to it later.
 
Big Sister, Little Sister

Two sisters sharing a space as grown-ups and each dealing with all the complicated emotions accumulated over the years between them. Each of them is looking for something and sometimes it's a simple moment that bridges all the gaps from growing together. 

Growing Out

This is an arc of developing self-awareness through relationships and family history. 

This is How It Happened

"This is how it happened. After many years of being happier than anyone we knew, which worked me, my partner of a dozen years and I broke up. I still loved him, in a deeply familial way, but the moments of palpable deadness occurring with ever greater frequency in our relationship warned me we'd reach the end of our mutual growth. How to end it? How to get away?" 

Reading this section, I was struck by the earlier scene where the two of them are standing outside the Brooklyn courthouse having just signed divorce papers and she tries to reach out to her ex-husband, but he's uninterested and only seeks to get away. When she turns to leave, she's so relieved that he's essentially already gone from her life. However, throughout the rest of her life, she's often shocked by how absent he is. I'm not sure the story line is the same, but they could be from the same family because each feels so haunted by the other. The narrator is unnamed and could be the same. It could be shortly after her divorce as she's journeying back to herself. 

The next chapter of this section is the story of a young, gay woman struggling to remain connected with her mother as a religious group continues to push the mother to cut all connections with the daughter. Their relationship is complicated, but I made everyone uncomfortable on the bus with my outrageous burst of laughter during the scene where she takes her mother and two other women 60+ years old to see their first porno. They see Deep Throat in the theater and discuss it all the way home. 

"Yes, I said. I don't see how people stand to stay married to one person for the whole of their lives. 
"That's not what you said when your momma and I got divorced. 
"It's not, I said. But I didn't know any better then. You'd been together the entire time I'd known you. "I couldn't imagine my own life without the assurance that the two of you were living in the same house. 
"Houses get small, he said. 
"I'm hip, I said." 

The Way Forward is with a Broken Heart

This feels like the actual meditation alluded to in the first section of the book. It's more like the letter Walker wrote to her younger self and younger husband. 

"We are not even the only ones not speaking to each other. Across America elders are not speaking to each other, though most of us will find we have a lot to say, after we've cried in each other's arms. We are a frightened, a brokenhearted nation; some of us wanting desperately to run back to the illusory "safety" of skin color, money or the nineteen fifties. We've never seen weather like the weather there is today. We've never seen violence like the violence we see today. We've never seen greed or evil like the greed and evil we see today. We've never seen tomatoes either, like the ones being created today. There is much from which to recoil. 

"And yet, Stranger who perhaps I am never to know, the past doesn't exist. It cannot be sanctuary. Skin color has always been a tricky solace, more so now that the ozone has changed. After nature is destroyed, money will remain inedible. We have reached a place of deepest emptiness and sorrow. We look at the destruction around us and perceive our collective poverty. We see that everything that is truly needed by the world is too large for individuals to give. We find we have only ourselves. our experience. Our dreams. Our simple art. Our memories of better ways. Our knowledge that the world cannot be healed in the abstract. That healing begins where the wound was made.

"Now it seems to me we might begin to understand something of the meaning of earnest speaking and fearless listening; something of the purpose of the most ancient form of beginning to make the world: remembering what the world we once made together was like. 

"I send you my sorrow. And my art. 

"In the sure knowledge that our people, the American race, lovers who falter and sometimes fail, are good."

In short, this was the right broken-hearted book for my messy, broken heart. It helped me mend and reminded me that all the struggles continue happening in various degrees and are never completely separate. I'm not sure I actually needed reminding, but the validation that Alice Walker provides is some of the best therapy.