Rating: 5/5

An ancient book from over 600 years in the past still famous, and relevant which is the reasons it's a classic undoubtedly. Geoffrey Chaucer wrote these bawdy tales with confidence working for the royal family sure helps. If you think fart jokes are a modern invention you're wrong and this proves this fact . The British have a quirky sense of humor and Nevill Goghill new translation captures the essence without losing the flavor intended by the author. Readers now may enjoy the amusing stories, incomprehensible words become clear . The simple plot about thirty ordinary people in long ago medieval England on a pilgrim to the shrine (tomb ) of Saint Thomas Becket in Canterbury Cathedral. 23 engrossing tales Chaucer wrote he never quite finished all, too busy working for the King and maybe losing interest or failing health we will never know but what is left is a precious jewel. I don't usually like short stories most people today feel the same way, but everything has exceptions. The prologue is thoroughly remarkable , showing how talent raises the ordinary above the Earth, reaching not the Moon but the Stars. My favorite is the Miller's Tale, mistaken identity becomes even after the passage of many centuries, still tickles the funny bone to be honest, brakes it. Nothing new under the Sun is quite apparent as we the grateful reader follow the narratives of these strange fables of drunks, sex addicts and gullible morons searching for the eternal get rich quick scheme of the Canon's Yeoman 's Tale, a little disguised Chaucer falling for an alchemy con man. Intelligent people's greed tricks them like anyone else. The Knight's Tale looks like just another love story, rival cousins enamored with the same woman, new then but common now yet aspects are still memorable. Another yarn very hilarious, The Summoner's Tale about an ailing man named Thomas known for being generous with funding the Church , is asked by a friar for the gold the sick gentleman said he had. To be delicate while reaching for the prize Thomas in bed lets go of bad gas instead. Not happy indeed the angry friar flees in disgust. There are certain books which become more than famous or even just a classic, these admittedly rare phenomenon like snow in San Diego or gardens on the Moon, nevertheless things bounce in ways unknown and where they fall surprises. Canterbury Tales is one and deserves to be.