Rating: 4/5

Another satisfying Rosamunde Pilcher novel. I am so glad my mum told me all about her, now I seek at least one to read over the summer break - it's just that kind of wholesome soulful reading. September was a touch long, but still with that feeling of warmth, of coming home. This is the way I feel when I read Maeve Binchy, also. I like feeling this way. 

This is so sweet, I feel we don't think of the simple stuff anymore. 
  He had his supper and his bath, and was now in bed reading his library book, which was by Enid Blyton and called The Famous Five. He heard the clock in the hall strike eight o'clock, followed by the sound of Vi's footsteps treading heavily up the staircase, which meant she was coming to say goodnight to him.

Strong female characters that are not necessarily gorgeous, but still beautiful in their own way. These women run farms and households, help their friends and think nothing of driving 10 miles up the road to lend out their tablecloths and vases. These women help their friends and seem to have an inexhaustible supply of friendship and tea. 
  "She wasn't in the least fashionable or chic, but she held herself so proudly, and that endowed her with a great elegance. She gave off an enormous charge of... enjoyment."

September is the best time of year, and an entire family are coming home, first loves and long absences are being discovered in Scotland. The thought of boarding school to an only son who’ll dreadfully miss his mum. The surrounds are beautiful and scenery inviting. The characters are very likable and Scotland may not be sunshiny all the time, but it seems that most people are happy. 
  "And you are her son. Imagine it. How strange life can be. At seventy-eight, you’d think that you’d stop being surprised, and something like this happens, and it’s as though the world has just begun.” 
The words of Vi, the capable and satisfied matriarch who is always helping her clan. Words spoken to a character related to the family in The Shell Seekers. A re-read, possibly? I think I'd like to re-visit that cast of characters.