Rating: 4/5

In Denver each year for several weeks in January, we celebrate cowboys and their culture with the National Western Stock Show drawing people from throughout the American West. There was a favorite western boutique shop in the trendy Lower Downtown, The Crybaby Ranch, that dealt in everything western including beautiful boots and western hats, beautiful books and many fashion accessories. And upon the opening of the stock show, this shop would have an invitation only, fabulous party. Excited to be there in the midst of all of the celebration, taking a glass of champagne and looking around, I saw Denver’s own gifted and renowned water colorist, William Matthews, and by his side was Annie Proulx signing their latest book together, Cowboys and Images: The Watercolors of William Matthews. Needless to say, I left with an autographed copy of that book. However, their first collaboration was for this book, Close Range: Wyoming Stories, where his six watercolors and the beautiful cover create an eloquent and visual dialogue of this incredible book of short stories. 

The eleven unforgettable stories in Close Range includes her famed story, Brokeback Mountain. Annie Proulx’s masterful language and beautiful prose portrays her fierce love of Wyoming in this collection of short stories about loneliness and violence and obsession. These are stories of desperation and hard times set in a harsh landscape that at the same time can be magnificent. 

   “You stand there, braced. Cloud shadows race over the buff rock stacks as a projected film, causing a queasy, mottled ground rash. The air hisses and it is no local breeze but the great harsh sweep of wind from the turning of the earth. The wild country—indigo jags of mountain, grassy plain everlasting, tumbled stones like fallen cities, the flaring roll of sky—provokes a spiritual shudder. It is like a deep note that cannot be heard but is felt, it is like a claw in the gut.”

And as the book cover so eloquently states: “Stories in Close Range have appeared in The New Yorker, The Atlantic Monthly, Harper’s, and GQ. They have been selected for the O. Henry Stories 1998 and The Best American Short Stories of the Century and have won the National Magazine Award for Fiction. This is work by an author writing at the peak of her craft.”