Rating: 5/5

Max Klein
Rich
English 10
31 August 2011
Book Review C

Banks, Russel. Rule of the Bone; “A Novel”. New York: HarperCollins Publishers, Inc., 1995.

	Rule of the Bone by Russel Banks is a fantastic read because of the experiences, and memories of the main character, Chappie (or Bone later in the book). Russel Banks does a great job of incorporating the crazy experiences of a rebel teen into a book that sounds believable. The description that Banks puts into certain scenes really makes the book fun, and enjoyable to read start to finish. 
	Some of the experiences that Chappie goes through at the young age of 15 are amazing. Even though it is a fiction book Russel Banks does a great job of making it sound believable. The situations that the 15 year old are in are crazy “it looked like the whole room was burning. It was a combination of beautiful and scary probably like war. The room went up like one of those smart bombs’d hit it and when me and Russ reached the ground we turned and stood there and looked up amazed at the sight” (Banks 80). The language that Russel Banks uses through out the novel makes it more believable. By writing the way a teenager thinks, Russel makes it feel as though you were Chappie in the scenarios. The amount of description that Banks adds to the book also makes it way more believable, and interesting. 
	Rule of the Bone is my favorite book at the moment because of the description that is so vivid through out the book. “I was slumped over sitting on one of the pillows watching the candle flame when suddenly this spider came drifting down from the ceiling and hovered over the flame for a minute and then like it’d gotten too hot the spider started trying to climb back up on its web. It struggled and fought but it was too late, the web turned into a gold wire and the spider lost it and dropped onto the flame where it got instantly crisped and its tiny ashy body floated up on the heat a ways and then it disappeared into thin air” (Banks 260). Banks takes an entire paragraph describing an action as simple as a spider being burnt by a candle. These small, seemingly insignificant additions make all the difference in a book to me. This is what takes Rule of the Bone from being an OK book to being a great book.
	Banks does a fantastic job of portraying a rebellious teen’s journey through the United States and Jamaca. Through out the whole book Russel Banks keeps the novel interesting and fun to read. After my 3rd time reading Rule of the Bone I still enjoy every page and would recommend it to a friend.