Rating: 5/5

Since this book’s publication (1998), scientific understanding of prions hasn’t seemed to change very much. But we have much prettier and detailed pictures of the PRP proteins.

Deadly Feasts provides a compelling history of our modern knowledge of TSE’s. It is accessible for the layman and highlights the collaborative and competitive culture of science. 
It is written in a way that more accurately shows the slow progression of science due to incubation times, epidemiological methods, resource availability, animal analogs, and other factors. 

The story of understanding prions has many parallels to the story of understanding nucleic acids. For every (almost always male) scientist being recognized for groundbreaking scientific advancements, there are dozens of scientists whose work was essential, but largely unrecognized. 
This is especially true for female scientists. Pat Merz’s work using electron microscopy to produce images of misfolded proteins that cause TSE is incredibly similar to Rosalind Franklin’s X-ray crystallography work elucidating the structure of DNA.

The sections detailing Britain’s handling of their mad-cow epidemic was scarily reminiscent of contemporary COVID responses in the US. It highlights, to me, the progressive attack on the scientific community and process for the sake of the economy and shareholders.

I could see this book being a great source material for discussions on the role and responsibilities of regulatory government agencies in protecting consumers from communicable diseases.

The epidemics cautiously predicted in the last section of Deadly Feasts have not been seen in the 25+ years since publication, but looking into modern outbreaks has been a fascinating topic of further research for me as a reader.

I enjoyed this book while keeping in mind the context of when it was written. It is informative, entertaining, and speculative about the future of TSE outbreaks. A valuable and quick read for readers of any background.