Rating: 4/5

The Time Machine is a quirky candidate for the father of science fiction with its time-travel elements and the year it was published back in 1895, plus the way it rushes into a far distant future.

It's also a bit old fashioned, focusing on a bunch of stuffy, important men dining on choice cuts and smoking expensive cigars while, suddenly, the main character mysteriously zips off into seemingly impossible worlds without scientific explanation.

Imagine what a time machine designed in 1895 would be like, with its mechanical levers, analogue dials and steam whistling out of its coal-fueled (probably) boiler. Basically just an upright seat in an open, oblong frame.

This book is phenomenally forward thinking for its age, including time lags associated with travelling through space - out there for days on end, maybe weeks - but when you come back it's only been a few minutes for everyone else, which means ageing while those at home remain the same, a concept that's been explored in many science fiction stories since.

The book focuses on a future race called the Eloi and how they subsist on the surface of the visited planet, a seemingly useless and weak people who live in lazy and ignorant abandonment, as well as their mirror image, the evil Morlocks who live physically out of sight in the shadows and under the ground, who run the industry that keeps everything running on the surface. The Morlocks regularly go to the surface to terrorize and prey on the unsuspecting Eloi, which creates dystopian horror rather than the superficial utopian bliss.

The Morlocks could be the forefather of Tolkien's orcs and there's a definite good versus evil element to this book, which works well.

Although a classic, this is not a flawless read. The unnamed main character gets an opportunity to explore the sinister depths and reveal the mysterious nature of how the Morlocks live, but instead clambers back to the surface before seeing anything, so we never find out what it's like down there. There is a disappointing lack of plot development because of this.

There is also a weird and almost husband-and-wife relationship between Unnamed and an Eloi called Weena as his little companion, who strokes his hair, sits on his shoulder and dotes on him.

A strange book to say the least, with distinct black and white contradictions and past vs future divergences that strangely combine really well. This fine literature gets more memorable as you reflect and think about it.

Although super far-fetched, H.G. Wells writes in an extremely charming and accessible way that's a total pleasure to read. This is a science fiction masterclass for the ages that's also quite wonderfully odd.