Rating: 1/5

The character that dies is the type that tells her mother all about her sexual life and sleeps with her best friend's man. Her best friend is of course not as pretty as the uniquely gorgeous character that speaks and writes in beautiful Japanese. Her gay friend is attached to her in a way that seems unhealthy and everyone idolizes her. Her mother is brash and obnoxious. I hate, consequently, all of the characters and can not understand what is so special about this woman. I think what I hate is when authors go on and on about how wonderful a character is, but then proceed to only mention banal and boring traits or things like, "she had a back that was beautiful and slender like a seahorse." What does that even mean? I would be much more interested in learning about a character that seemed ordinary but, when she dies, the reader finds out why her loved ones loved her or, even better, not why you love someone (because is there really a why to something like that?), but how they loved her. This book missed it's mark. Unless I change my mind in the second half...

Update: I finished the book last night and my opinion holds. I realized that what I hated about the book wasn't just the dead girl, but all of the characters and why I hated them is because not a single one of them felt real. They were all such types. This writer was trying so hard to create realistic characters that, instead of interesting quirky characters that you could relate to as a reader, you are left with a bunch of types with nothing behind the masks: the smart gay guy that is ashamed of his body, the good-looking gay guy that hates that he is only liked for his body, the married man that fantasies about other women and cheats on his wife but really loves her, and the new mother that is having a hard time letting her child out in the world without being afraid. Why can't the smart gay guy not care that he is unattractive or the wife cheats on her better looking husband or the husband is the one that has fears for their child? Because these aren't the type of people you would meet out on the street, or so the author thinks. Better stick to what she knows and what she knows seems to be middlebrow romance novels since all of the characters in this story could have been lifted from any of them. They might read and banter and drink more than their romance novel counterparts, but they are otherwise alike.