Today 25/06/26 she is 100.

This is the poetry* that makes you probe each word in your mouth, feel every throbbing little bite on the inner chick, grind your teeth with helplessness how the words can wound so deep, tear you open, become your thoughts without being your words. The words written in a language you do not understand, initially presented to you through other peoples’ filter; later, you take the words and use a machine not because you do not trust the translators: on the contrary, they made you want to get nearer to the original words, they raised the bar for you. But you want to hear just the words so you can get to the unfiltered thing: just the mind of this woman, her presence, her thoughts and no more humans in between. And for some scraps of her text you start to put these words together in a language that is not totally yours; you put them together so they can get out of your mind and your mouth and leave you; so you can be just you again without the ghost of this woman inside. Still you’ve been reminded about the existence of this dark vulnerable place, like a deep well inside you, unavailable to your own words that those other words could reach. The place where they drop, slosh, ring, the words stop being signs melt into particles, sounds, shapes of light and darkness, betray you, split into shards, cut you and then heal. 

Ingeborg Bachmann has rushed into post-war literary scene like a comet. But when i think about her i imagine something alive: not a comet, but a bird, a warm light-feathery creature with the wings letting her to experience the freedom of flying but at the same time disarming her with knowledge that this couldn’t last.

She has started with studying philosophy but after some time she has switched to poetry. After becoming familiar with early Ludwig Wittgenstein she has probably come to the conclusion that poetry was better use of the language if one is about to reveal any ‘truth’. However, it has to be a reinvented language. In her interviews Bachmann said: 

 I think that we cannot, indeed that we may not, use the old images, the way, say, Mörike or Goethe used them, because they would sound insincere coming from our mouths. We must find true sentences, which are worthy of our own zone of consciousness and of our changed world...I try to be sufficiently suspicious, suspect the words, the language, I have often told myself, heighten this suspicion—so that someday, maybe, something New can come into being.

And so she has started. With this unbearable sense of urgency and passion, she was creating new images, to shape this new consciousness, this new language for a changed world.

And so I lean into you, making the shadows ring. (In Twilight) 

The string of silence stretched across the wave of blood, I seized your resounding heart. (To speak darkly)

Imagine ‘the shadows ring’. They would if you try hard enough. Imagine how one can cover a betrayal or sense of loss - any bleeding wound inside - with silence. (By writing this, do i risk to replace her stunning imagery with my cliches? Anyway i feel inspired to speak by her so i will speak for now.)

The wheels grind to a halt. Through the dust and cloud husks,
the Ferris wheel slurs the coat that covered our love.
 
Nowhere are last kisses guaranteed before the first
as they are here. You simply carry on in silence with the
sound of their aftertaste on your tongue.
(Tr. Lilian M Friedberg)

’Nowhere are last kisses guaranteed before the first’. People write novels wasting words, paper and everyone’s time, while this is a perfect poignant love story in a single phrase. She rushed to live, to experience and feel as if she knew she had a very limited time:

Silver-tinseled birds rise, and the scent of cinnamon!
I am alone with my murderer, Time.
We cocoon ourselves half-seas over in blues.
(Tr. Lilian M Friedberg)

Like a tight string on a violine, she was acutely attuned to time, to its rhythm both her internal and historical. 

It was the first decade after the war. There were no active battlefields anymore. But the battles are ongoing in the souls of people. Their visible and hidden wounds weren't necessarily healing. What was certainly reappearing was hypocrisy in the society where the necessity of reconciliation might prevail over necessity of justice. Where your father might be an avid supporter of a genocidal regime while your lover might be its victim. And you have to live with this somehow. Where there was a shadow of the new ‘colder’ war is growing. 

The war is no longer declared,
But rather continued. The outrageous 
has become everyday. The hero
is absent from the battle. The weak 
have been thrust into the firing line.
(Tr. Lilian M Friedberg)

Also she had to use not simply a language, but German language. The language that has been recently used to give orders to decimate innocent people in mass and to glorify people giving those orders. She needed to use this language to create beauty, to shape new meaning. Never-mind this: she needed this tongue to be understood in her daily life. It wasn't a theoretical question, it was a daily experience. She didn’t have the luxury of choice being surrounded by its cloud:

I drift through all languages
with the German tongue —
this cloud I hold around me
like a house
 
Oh, but the way it darkens
the sinister, the tenor of rain
only a few of them fall
 
Then it lifts the dead man into the lighter zones.
(Tr. Lilian M Friedberg)

This is a fragment from ‘Exile’, the poem she has written from a perspective of an old man; or was it just a voice she couldn’t help but hearing inside?

She wasn’t the only one grappling with this issue of German language. In his acceptance speech for the Bremer Literature Prize, Paul Celan, a fellow poet and her on-and-off lover, whose parents have perished in Holocaust, had tried to describe this phenomenon: 

 It, the language, remained, not lost, yes, in spite of everything. But it had to pass through its own answerlessness, pass through frightful muting, pass through the thousand darknesses of death bringing speech. It passed through and gave back no words for that which happened; yet it passed through this happening. Passed through and could come to light again, ‘enriched’ by all this.

At this stage, they were both optimistic and hopeful about the power of that new ‘enriched’ language and their own power over it. Maybe they’ve won the first battle. They’ve found new words, metaphors. They’ve reinvented the tongue. But it cost them dearly: it was too painful. They’ve won the battle but both of them have ended up losing a war, the war within themselves, for themselves. But I am running ahead. 

Ingeborg was a celebrity. She has published two very successful collections of poetry; she did a lot for radio. She was always a centre of attention surrounded by a bunch of bohemian friends. And it seemed she has found love in the relationship with Max Frisch, a Swiss writer. However, any relationship, any steady occupation, even being famous constrains personal freedom. And it seems she was just too free for all of that. A bird need to be in flight: no single person or a single place is good enough. 

Her relationship with Frisch, their complicated reckless love for each other, their betrayals has had a tremendous impact on her work. Her poetry that she hardly published at that time has become almost unbearably revealing about two people who cannot be together but cannot be apart either. It was hard on her. It was hard for him as well. In his novel Montauk many years later, Max Frisch wrote:

Her independence was part of her radiance. Jealousy was the price I had to pay for it, and I paid it in full. Lying on the summery balcony with its view across Rome, I slept with my face in my own vomit. By suffering I only increased my tender longings. But when she was there, she was there.

He loved her for her ‘radiance’ but it came together with her desire to be free. He was not a boy, he was forty eight and more than decade of her senior. According to La Rochefoucauld, ’Jealousy contains more of self-love than of love’. I am not sure how it works in this case, but ‘the green-eyed monster’ did mock both of them. 

In parallel she seemed to struggle to define her femininity: not that much in her relationship with men but in her writing. It seemed a tortuous process for her. She felt she could only know how to tell a story from a masculine position. But I have often asked myself: why, really? I have not understood it, not even in the case of the short stories, why I so often had to adopt the voice of the masculine ‘I’​.  

It is strange as initially reading her earlier poems, I would never imagine that they could be written by anyone apart from a young woman. But when I’ve learned that reflection of hers, I went back and started to see this duality. Many poems were still very feminine, even girlish. But some others clearly presented a perspective of a man and did it very naturally. A poem ‘Borrowed Time’ (Die gestundete Zeit) is a good example. I was amazing how could she do it with such an authenticity. But apparently it was troubling her. She could not write from a female perspective without feeling this controlling male voice inside. 

This has reminded me of her masterpiece Malina a feminist classic. In that novel she was very successful in conveying this duality, this turbulent coexistence of the feminine and masculine through seemingly splitting these sides into two separate characters. In any case, it seems almost certain that in her later work she has succeeded in fully expressing her feminine side.

Eventually they did break up with Frisch. There is no single photo of them together. She didn’t take it lightly - she felt lost. 

A kind of loss (Eine Art Verlust)

We’ve used to share: seasons, books, and music. 
The keys, the mugs, the breadbasket, the sheets 
And a bed. 
A dowry of words, of gestures, brought along, 
used, used up.
The house made orderly. Said. Done. And always
The hand - to your hand.

In winter, in a Viennese septet and in summer I
fell in love.
In maps, in an alpine hideout, in a beach and in
A bed.
Making a cult with dates, with unbreakable promises, 
idolising a Something, pious before a Nothing

(-the folded newspaper, the aches got cold, 
the scrap with a note)

Fearless in religion, for the church was this bed. 

A view of the lake was infinite source of my painting.
From the balcony the peoples, my neighbours,
Might be greeted
By the fireplace’s safety, my hair has gained its full colour
A doorbell ringing was the alarm for my joy.

I haven’t lost you, i’ve lost the world.
(my translation)**

Here is stunning pulsating song the french artist Delphine Dora has composed with German lyric of this poem. It cannot live a human being unmoved. This is definitely as feminine poem as any other woman could imagine. It seems through losing him she has managed to tune into this very light, very female way of voicing out inner feelings. However, the darkness inside and inability to get it out into the open would never release her from its grip for too long. This struggle helped her to produce brilliant poetry, but it caused pain, anxiety and fuelled her tendency to dull it with the pills and alcohol. 

That it was worse yesterday

In the crack in the wall I saw in a moment of panic a black beetle who was playing dead.
I’d like to speak to him,
to show him a way out of this lovely house, to show him an exit, or stomp on him right away.

I learned something from him, I myself
am also playing dead, having fallen into the crack of Berlin, disappearing from the face of the planet,
stared at as well by those eyes between two fire walls, with whom I can no longer speak with in a moment of panic.

To finally stomp on me also occurs to him, and to me
in my madness, I being the same one who stares at both me and the beetle, holding a novel 
heavy enough to kill this beetle.
(tr. by Peter Filkins)

This scream of a poem reverberates with Malina. In the novel, her character eventually also disappears into a crack of the wall while her flatmate coldly accepts it's happening. Yet again in this poem it seems she was perceiving her mental struggle as a fundamental fight between the feminine and the masculine parts of her personality, I being the same one who stares at both me and the beetle where the masculine (Jung might have called this ‘Animus’) was destroying the defenceless gentle goodness that the feminine side tried to propagate. 

It is uncanny that approximately at the same time when this poem was written Clarice Lispector has published her iconic novel The Passion According to G.H.. In this book, her main character does kill an insect; not a beetle, but a cockroach. Staring at this dead roach, she seems to be feeling similar to Bachmann’s poetic alter-ego: unbearably and existentially connected to this insect. At some point Lispector’s character exclaims:

I don't know what to do with the horrifying freedom that can destroy me.

Did Ingeborg start to realise exactly this thing in that time? We would never know. But we know that she has become disenchanted with poetry: specifically with its ability to be instrumental in shaping the new consciousness she was aspiring to earlier. In private life the words didn’t lead to any understanding, just to more pain. In the public realm she continued to see the same hypocrisy and cruelty in spite of the material conditions getting better. 

In 1964 she said the final farewell by writing her last poem ever. 

No Delicacies (Keine Delikatessen);

Nothing appeals to me anymore.
 
Should I
garnish a metaphor
with an almond blossom?
crucify the syntax
to  halation?
Who would wrack the brain
over such trivialities —
 
I have learned one thing
from the words
that exist
(for the lowest class)
 
hunger
    humiliation
        tears
and
                      darkness.
 
I will get by on the
unclean heaving of my shoulders,
on the desperation
(and desperation may yet drive me to despair)
over the widespread suffering,
the ills, the cost of living.
 
It’s not the Word I neglect,
it’s myself.
God knows
the others can help themselves
to comfort in words.
But I am not my own assistant.
 
Should I
imprison a thought,
surrender it to the well-lit cell of a sentence?
pamper eye and ear
with first-class morsels of words?
research the libido of a vowel,
determine the collectible value of consonants?
 
Must I
with a hammering head,
with this writer’s cramp in my hand,
under pressure of the three hundredth night,
rift away at the paper,
sweeping away these authorial operatic scraps,
with a vengeance: I you and he/she/it
 
we, all of you?
 
(Should indeed. Should leave it to the others.)
 
And let my part be lost.
Tr. Lilian M Friedberg

In The Passion According to G.H., the character says: “Language is my human effort. My destiny is to search and my destiny is to return empty-handed. But - I return with the unsayable. The unsayable can only be given to me through the failure of my language.’ . It seems in Bachmann’s case, she did not return empty-handed, she returned with hands full of darkness. In the earlier poem she writes ‘I know only darkness to speak.’. And in this last poem she acknowledges she has lost her part of the game: ‘It’s not the word i neglect it is myself’. She has stopped writing any poetry. But it seems she has not totally given up on her project of searching for a new way of using the language. She focused on prose and has conceived a series of novels planning to address those things that ‘exist’: ‘hunger, humiliation, tears and darkness’ without poetic metaphors. Her project was called Todesarten, (‘ways of dying’ is a possible translation). 'Malina' was supposed to become ‘overture’ of the cycle. In spite of such a title, the project did have a dreamy, utopian side to it. Still it seems she wanted to show the ubiquitousness of violence: internal within a human soul as well, the hidden one in a hypocritical society and the one spilling out into the open on a daily basis (especially against women). It seems she was trying to investigate whether it was at all possible to invent a new language ‘game’ (usinge Wittgenstein’s terminology) to fight this. 

On September 14, 1966, Clarice Lispector suffered an accident in her apartment. After taking a sleeping pill, she fell asleep in her bed with a lit cigarette. She was seriously injured and her right hand almost had to be amputated. But she has survived. (Wiki)

On October 18, 1973 The New York Times has published the following:

ROME, Oct. 17 — Ingeborg Bachmann, an Austrian poet and writer, died here last night from extensive burns. She was 47 years old. Miss Bachmann was taken to the hospital three weeks ago following an accident thought to have been caused by her falling asleep with a lighted cigarette.

There is no mystery here just tragic coincidence. But how one can comprehend this without assigning some symbolism? Maybe it was simple: maybe it was just that quite a few gifted women of post-war generation (feeling hope but still feeling smoke in the air) have seen their hopes crashed and had to compromise their unlimited capacity to dream with their inability to fulfil those dreams in a way they wished. Bachmann seemed to have it all: early fame, abundance of talent and love of men. But it was not enough. Something was lacking.

She knew how to talk to the birds. In the one of her early poems My Bird (Mein Vogel), she has shared her vision: 

When I, crowned with smoke,
know again, whatever happens, 
my bird, my nightly accomplice,
when I am ablaze at night, 
a dark grove begins to crackle
and I strike the sparks from within me.
(tr. Peter Filkins)