Rating: 4/5

Cassandra, the daughter of the Trojan King Priam and his wife Hecuba, a priestess who had to sacrifice her virginity and who could foresee the future but whose foretelling nobody would believe. Gift and curse bestowed upon her by Apollo. 

Hers were to be the preposterous prophecies. That was her destiny and her identity.

During a trip to Greece with her husband in the early 1980s, Christa Wolf (1929-2011) began reading Aeschylus The Oresteia during a flight delay. Fascinated she pursued investigating the myths around the House of Atreus and the Trojan War. As a citizen of the GDR but as a prominent writer she was often granted permission to travel to Western Europe. This novel is the outcome of a series of four lectures she had to give in 1982, in Frankfurt, on Aesthetics. The novel form was published at the same time, in 1983, both in West and East Germany.

Wolf’s novel presents Cassandra upon her arrival in Argos, as a captive of Agamemnon at the end of the war. She had predicted that her brother Paris would bring about the dreadful Trojan War but nobody gave any credit to her. Now in Greek lands, and in the brink of the disappearance of her future, for her death is imminent and immanent, she uses her last opportunity to warn us for soon she will have no more future to tell. The forewarning has transformed into history. A black future. A vanishing present. A bleak past. 

Like prophecies, this novel offers multiple angles.

It can be read as Wolf’s coded political criticism of the GDR regime. This entails searching for straight parallels between characters and institutions. This reading did not interest me. It is too encroached in a precise point in time and place. The significance of that interpretation can easily perish.

It can also be read as a female retelling of a male heroic past. This offers a more compelling view. And yet, I do not think Wolf entirely succeeds in this subversion of the patriarchal approach to war and its values. If heroes like Achilles are given the epithets in true Homeric fashion, such as ‘the Beast’ (das Vieh), then of course he will be received as a beast. This is Wolf acting as the traditional narrator, who with the voice of a ventriloquist is telling us how we have to see her characters. Wolf as the creator of her mythical and somewhat contrived world.

Rather, it is Cassandra’s investigation of identity that kept my reading engaged. By turning Cassandra’s gaze not into the abstract future, but inwardly, through her memory, towards the past, we follow her fascinating probe into the events, the personalities, and the motives that constituted the Aegean debacle. And we follow her internal monologue as if she were pulling the threads from a foregone future and weaving them into an intertwined past. No longer the prophetess but a bard chanting her inner and external scrutiny. 

In formulating Cassandra’s internal voice Wolf’s handling of time as fungible consciousness is magisterial. But, ironically, as Wolf has also deprived her heroine of what is after all her being--her ability to prophesy, even if her curse is that no one will believe her. But, how come are we expected to believe Cassandra’s account of her past? That would be against her nature. 

Is she really then Cassandra? What is legitimately her identity? Or is it that the loss of her identity is really her end, or vice versa?