Rating: 4/5

3.5 to 4 Stars

This book did not age well, but it is not the book’s fault.

Published in 2000, it deals a lot with how quiet things had been in America since the 1980’s in regards to extremist terrorism except for the bombing of the parking garage of the World Trade Center in the mid-90s. There are many mentions of the country being somewhat lax in its concerns over terrorism making it ripe for another attack. There are also many discussions of the World Trade Center and characters looking at it and thinking about what it stands for and how the bombing shows how vulnerable we are on our own soil. So, yeah . . . I cringed a few times while reading.

Also, because it is pre-9/11 it has a lot of the Reagan-Era Cold War gusto feel to it. This is not good or bad, it just made it very obvious to me how different books dealing with terrorism as one of their main plot points feel different in the post-9/11 world. It’s almost like you could say this is an artifact of political thrillers to be studied by literary anthropologists - kind of fascinating in that respect.

All of that aside, it was a pretty entertaining thriller. A bit cheesy at times – forcing some humor down the throat of the reader while keeping them on the edge of their seat with some decent action and mystery. The main protagonist, John Corey, is a sarcastic, some-what sexist pig with a heart of gold. No matter what the situation, whether wooing a female co-worker or looking evil straight in the face he is cracking jokes and making light of the situation. So, he is silly, entertaining, and often another cringe-causing element in this book.

If you like political thrillers with macho leads and non-PC humor set in the world of pre-9/11 terrorism, then you will probably enjoy this one. But, note my mention of “non-PC” – if that bothers you at all, this might be one to avoid. However, I will say that DeMille’s take on terrorists is less angry and controversial than some recent political thrillers I have read – I think that may also be another reflection of this being pre-9/11.