Rating: 4/5

Der Abenteuerliche Simplicissimus Teutsch written in 1668 is considered to be the first German novel of importance. It's inspired by the then popular Spanish picaresque novels and sets out to provide an all-encompassing view of life in Teutschland during the thirty-years war in short humorous episodes seen through the eyes of a seemingly simple mind called Simplicius Simplicissimus. This is what I expected.
What I wasn't expecting and surprised me as I didn't read about this before, is it's nature as a moral play on virtues and sins, creed and condemnation. Grimmelshausen specifically condemns the omnipresent foolery of mankind in their short-sighted quests for money, fame, lust and makes the case for a solemn life agreeable to god. The thirty-years war only serves as plot, not as content. More on that later.
The initial five books cover the years from 1632 until the end of the thirty-years war in 1648. It starts with 11 year old Simplicius' humble beginnings as an - adopted as we learn later - son of peasants that flees from soldiers to the woods when the farm of his elders is burned down. He spends two years with a hermit in these woods who teaches him the values of a religious life. As Simplicius discovers many years later, the hermit actually was his real father. After the hermit's death he's introduced to society as a jester at the Swedish governor's court in Hanau. From there on, stints in various armies and positions follow. Simplicius is making a career as the famous Jäger von Soest, discovers women and experiences many adventures. Phases of richness and poverty, arrogance and humbleness - he sums them up as "Baldanders" (ever changing) in the final chapter of the fifth book - are interchanging seeing our hero at his highs and lows. The higher he gets the more vain he becomes the deeper he falls again and again. Each ascend carries the seed for another demise.
On the success of the publication Grimmelshausen added a sixth book a year later which differs widely from the others. Moral guidelines formerly addressed indirectly in the story now are the main content. Allegorical scenes alternate with absurd scenes, he even talks with toilet paper (!). I guess most modern readers haven't read up to this point. Grimmelshausen already left real world locations for the first time in the fifth book by introducing the phantasmagorial location of an underwater realm in the center of the earth peopled by an intermediate species between man and animal which noticeably can't ascend to god when it perishes but in any other concern reassembles humans; one of the entrances to the realm is the Mummelsee in the Black Forest but other entrances are located all around the world and connected through this realm. That way Simplicissimus pays a visit to our antipodes. The author follows up on this fantastic travel within the sixth book when the hero finally ends up on a fertile secluded island in the Indian Ocean like Robinson Crusoe. There he finally finds to god. The last book reminds me of Faust II in its almost complete departure from reality although it's much more readable. 
While there are parallels between Grimmelshausen's and Simplicissimus' life, it's not an autobiography. The author and his protagonist are both born in 1622 and Grimmelshausen lived in many locations of the book but he wasn't known as a soldier. Grimmelshausen uses the narrative method of introducing truths through the eyes, the mouth and the hands of a fool. 
For the son of a baker he has an astonishing broad education which is demonstrated throughout when he puts everything he knows into the book, be it science, literature or religion. The book is a treasure to discover classical and renaissance motifs. It helps that copyright wasn't an issue in 17th century as he copied long passages from older books, mostly without mentioning.
The language is slightly adapted to modern readers for readability, e.g. 'für' and 'vor' were used the opposite way at the time and are interchanged. Viewn from a 21st century perspective, a modern lector would have reduced the book to half its length. The sparse reading public in the 17th century had more time and less diversion. Still, it's a worthy read after almost 350 years. Man hasn't changed much since, the only real change is the diminished importance of religion as a guide to daily life.