Rating: 4/5

This is an easier book to admire than to love. When I search for comparisons, the only book that comes to mind is John Barth's Giles Goat-Boy, and I'm now smacking myself on the forehead for not realizing this connection sooner -- the hero of this book was indeed called (among other names) goat-boy. By rights, this fellow (called John Kaltenbrunner) should be as well-known as Paul Bunyon, though his story is decidedly less uplifting.

Both books are what can only be described as completely over-the-top tall tales. Barthes' book (which I read in my teens and recall only in the barest outlines) was a sendup of academia and Egolf's of smug Midwestern towns. Both involve messianic characters who start off just trying to live their lives in peace before events overtake them. Of the two, Giles was funnier, and Barnyard scarier, because the events in Barnyard, while brewed into a thick, lethal concentrate, were any one them plausible....The only implausibility was their accumulation into a single town in a single period of time.

That this book exists at all is somewhat miraculous, given its length, the quality of the writing, and the bravery of its conception. The author was all of 27 years old when it was published. My main complaint in the book is that it seems to have been written by somebody who is not lacking in experience, but lacking in exposure to alternate worldviews. Many of the ghastly details of life in small Midwestern towns are far too keenly observed to be wholly figments of his imagination, but I was left wishing he'd spent more time listening to other people with a more balanced sensibility. This book was a long revenge fantasy, the first half of which was the heaping of injustice upon injustice on young John Kaltenbrunner, and the latter half was the utter destruction of the town that had treated him so brutally. (This is not a spoiler, having been laid out in the opening paragraphs.)

It's a shame Egolf didn't live longer. His talents for storytelling, compelling prose and clarity of vision would have served him well in life if only he had more exposure to those things that make life worth living, rather than things he felt were worth dying for.

Thanks to Stephen for the suggestion and buddy read.