Rating: 4/5

The second installment in the X-Wing series carries the same charm as the first, and Rogue Squadron’s mission is more detailed and thrilling, but certain elements hold the novel back slightly. Due to how the first four X-Wing novels tell an overarching story, I can imagine that my opinion on the individual books will change once I have the whole picture. For now, because this installment is the middle of the story, I feel unsure about critiquing different aspects of the narrative because they might be resolved at a later time.

The death of Bror Jace, which took place in-between novels, felt a little strange, especially since he was set up as the best in Rouge Squadron by the end of the last novel. I understand there is likely a comic that covers this part of the story, but the relationship that Bror had with Corran was significant enough that I think Bror deserved some better treatment in this book. However, this is one of those elements that might be addressed at a later time since Corran might try to investigate the ambush that caught Bror, or I also wouldn’t be surprised if Bror was actually still alive and simply captured because of how the story placed his death in an awkward spot.

The infiltration of Coruscant was incredibly interesting; the division of the squadron members into small teams and the level of secrecy and rigidity regarding the mission information both added to the mission’s sense of urgency and importance. I think the novel could have taken advantage of these smaller teams to devise more character confrontations and discussions that wouldn’t have taken place otherwise, but the team-ups are still compelling, and the actions the characters take to complete their respective sub-missions are written well.

Corran teaming up with Erisi did give another opportunity to explore the romance sub-plot, and I’m still happy with how the romance is being handled. The way that Corran weighs his interest in Erisi with his interest in Mirax is rather mature.

Moving over to the Empire’s side of the narrative, I’m still not terribly impressed with Iceheart as a villain. She doesn’t carry much of a threatening presence. Loor’s reactions to meeting with her are the closest we get to understanding the effect she has on other people, but Iceheart still hasn’t done much. She has only threatened and sent chills down Loor’s spine, but she hasn’t displayed any real punishment for a subordinate’s failure, and as a result, the reader doesn’t know how seriously to take her as a threat.

Loor was consistent with his portrayal in the last novel, and he’s definitely the more interesting villain because of his connection with Corran, but he’s still depicted as a valuable asset for the Empire rather than a menace for the Rebellion.

The spy subplot with suspicion circling around Tycho Celchu made some slight developments, and I’m invested in discovering more. Tycho is a likable character, so on one hand, I want him to be innocent, but on the other, evidence is rising against him. I’m still not really convinced he’s the spy because of how hard the narrative seems to be pushing forward others’ suspicion towards him. At the very least, if he is the spy, I’m hoping for another layer to be revealed. For example, he could be unaware that he’s the spy in the same way Emtrey is unaware of his extra programming. I just can’t imagine anyone from Alderaan willingly helping the Empire.

A small appearance from Lieutenant Needa in the climax of the novel also felt out of place. If they bring back his character in the next two books, I’ll be fine with the introduction here, but otherwise the appearance feels unwarranted. 

Aside from the story, I also have a small annoyance with Stackpole’s writing style. He seems to be trying too hard to make the novel sound like it takes place in the Star Wars universe. Phrases like “as sure as the Emperor is dead” or “they go together like oxygen and hydrogen,” as well as repeated references to the Thrawn trilogy, specifically the Katana fleet, tend to take me out of the experience rather than reinforce the immersion.

Frankly, I’m being overly critical because this is the second novel. Because it still hasn’t wrapped everything up in a nice bow, it’s difficult to be confident about how I’d rate it.

With all my complaining, I still greatly enjoyed the book! I especially think the climax of this novel was greater than the last, partly because of the greater stakes, but also due to the constant smaller problems that appeared and brought up the tension. And I can’t go without saying that all of the characters are likable despite the differing levels of development.

I’m still looking forward to the next book, and I can’t wait to see where the story goes!