Rating: 5/5

Pulitzer 3 for the year. Stone Diaries had not been on my radar this year. When I made the decision to read only women authors, I had to think about my Pulitzer winners for the month and save the books written by men for another time. Although I prefer nonfiction, I have always enjoyed a family saga or series of books that take place over the course of a century or longer. A quality saga or historical fiction as such can teach readers as much about the world as nonfiction can. When I saw the blurb about the Stone Diaries, I surmised that it was a book that I would want to read. The author Carol Shields comes from the Midwest and rose in the ranks to be on the board of the University of Winnipeg. Her protagonist lives into her nineties and sees how the world changes over the course of the twentieth century. Always in search of books with strong female protagonists, I selected The Stone Diaries as one of my Pulitzer winners for this month. Because I had zero expectations going in other than that the author is an academic originally from the Chicago suburbs, I left this book wowed by the literary prose and storyline that spanned four generations over the course of the 20th century. 

Cuyler Goodwill was an only child who used his skill as a stone cutter to get out of his parents home in his early twenties. A chance meeting while doing contract work at a local orphanage lead him to meet his wife Mercy Stone, hence the Stone Diaries. Stones both literally and figuratively play a key role over the course of the novel. At first, it appears that the stone quarry outside of Winnipeg is what gives the characters their income, but stone and flora become as key to the narrative as the personas. Mercy Stone was a mountain of a woman who had no concept of how her body worked and as an orphan had little capacity to love, her heart of stone. Less than two years into her marriage, she goes into labor not knowing that she is pregnant, Cuyler feeling deceived by his wife. It is 1905 and a single man was not viewed as being capable of raising a child, especially a girl. The real life comparison I can give is when Theodore Roosevelt left his daughter Alice with his sister to raise following the death of his wife. Single men did not raise children at the dawn of the 20th century. The baby Daisy would be raised by her neighbor Clarentine Flett and her son Barker, a teacher in the fledgling town Winnipeg. Precocious and enjoying the outside, Daisy had no recollections of her parents, only her “Aunt” Clarentine and Barker, a man who loved Daisy from the first time he laid eyes on her. 

Years pass. Clarentine is killed. In the interim, Cuyler Goodwill erects a monument out of stone in memory of his wife. He is sought after for his work as a stone cutter and accepts a position in Bloomington, Indiana and decides that Daisy will have a better future there than in Winnipeg. Barker Flett over this time had become a renown botanist and leaves behind his family, accepting a position in Ottawa. Although separated from Daisy, his memories and love for her are sealed in his heart. I thought of the relationship between Ralph and Meggie in The Thorn Birds and could not help but smile. Cuyler goes from stone cutter to businessman. His company supplies limestone to companies erecting skyscrapers, cementing the United States’ place as a world power, including the Empire State Building. Barker collects lady slippers and also rises in his profession, becoming a pillar of Ottawa’s society. Every two months he writes a letter to Daisy and she responds. In the interim, Daisy earns a degree at Long College for Women during an era when few women attended college. Had she been born in a different era, she could have been an academic, and one could say that if that were the case, she would be Shields’ alter ego. After graduation women were expected to earn their Mrs degree or become secretaries. Daisy fell for Harold Hoad, the son of a respectable Bloomington family. The marriage did not last long due to a tragic accident. For various reasons, Daisy’s marriage begins to turn Daisy, Cuyler, and Barker’s hearts to stone. A twenty three year old widow, Daisy was ripe for the taking but uninterested in any of Bloomington’s bachelors. To get a leg up in life, she, like the author, would eventually leave the Midwest for Canada. 

Daisy’s life path leads her to marry Barker Flett, he more thrilled with this prospect than she is. By age thirty two, Daisy’s heart is hardened. It’s an easy marriage to a man twenty years her senior or live life in her newly married father’s house as a spinster. Despite their advancing age, the couple manage to have three children: Alice, Warren, and Joanie. It appears that the novel is the three of them looking back at their mother’s life at her funeral, but much of the novel is told through Daisy’s point of view, with perspectives offered by those closest to her. Her husband and father pass on the same year and Daisy lives the rest of her life masking grief. It is the 1950s. Women are housewives and do not work much outside of the home. Daisy’s one love is gardening, which is emblematic of her name, and she parlays this into a job as a columnist with the pseudonym Mrs Green Thumb. Gardening and writing about it appear to be the one love of Daisy’s life. Yes, she stayed “happily” married for twenty years, but she contained baggage from not having biological parents or even parents in law. The Stone Diaries are aptly named to chronicle the family history but also to chart how all of the stones decrease their capacity to love over time. While none of the family appeared to be particularly happy, I kept reading to see if Daisy would achieve happiness in a long life that outwardly appeared well lived. 

The one family member Daisy doted on is her great niece Victoria. Victoria loves her Aunt Daisy like an actual grandmother and visits her multiple times a year in Florida after Daisy moved there in her older age. At this point, Daisy’s own children witnessed a bitter woman who was difficult to live with and moved as far from her as possible. Alice is the one readers hear the most because she takes the time to correspond with her mother; however, she lives in England, a professor of Russian literature, and visiting with her mother is difficult. Joanie makes her home in the Pacific Northwest and moves all over the west, essentially a hippie. Warren has the stoniest heart of the three because he appears self-centered as an adult and hardly communicates with his mother at all. That leaves Daisy with Victoria and brags to everyone how she is studying to earn a PhD in paleobotany. Victoria appears to be the only member of the family at peace with her situation, a contrast with Daisy who still has issues with her early childhood in her older age. It is Victoria who encourages Daisy to break out of her shell and travel to Europe with her while it occurs to Victoria that Aunt Daisy would have been happier staying home; however, the trip came with discovery, and Daisy toward the end of her life achieves some happiness at seeing Victoria at peace with her own life choices, a much more peaceful soul than other members of the Flett family who generations earlier lost the capacity to love. 

Carol Shields, according to reviewers, is a writer’s writer. She wrote over twenty books all full of high end literary prose. She also, they note, must be a reader’s writer because The Stone Diaries won both the Canadian General’s Award and the Pulitzer Prize in the same year. The edition I read included an introduction by Penelope Lively, a wonderful author in her own right, who is a huge fan of Shields’ work. She has read The Stone Diaries multiple times and proclaimed it to be Shields’ opus. Shields continued to write even after becoming a respected academic. In the Goodwill/Stone/Flett family, she created a saga that explores a family devoid of love over the course of a century. Including actual historical events that occurred from the Lindbergh voyage to the Dionne quintuplets places this novel over the top. I have read a number of Pulitzers at some point and have found some better than others. Like any reader, I have my favorites. The Stone Diaries was not on my reading radar so I had few expectations going in. I left with a sense of a woman who tried her hardest to achieve happiness in her life, readers witnessing how life changes over time. From zero expectations going in, I left with The Stone Diaries vaulting into my top five Pulitzers read. I am honored to have read Shields during this women’s history month. 

4.5 stars