Rating: 5/5

This is a 1936 hard-boiled noir by American author Jonathan Latimer and is the third book in the private detective William Crane series. The setting is in 1930s depression-era Chicago. Crane is like the unnamed operative in Dashiell Hammett’s Continental Op series. He works for a New York based detective agency headed by a Colonel Black. The book is well written, fast paced, with good dialogue, and has a complex plot with a surprise ending. Latimer is a writer who is very good at coming up with complex and creative plots. 

Spoiler Alert. The book starts with Bill Crane being asked to trace the identify of a dead woman known as Alice Ross, who police believe has committed suicide by hanging herself in the Princess Hotel in Chicago. The client of Crane is the rich Courtland family in New York, who wants to know if the dead girl is their estranged daughter Kathryn Courtland. Soon after Crane saw the dead body in the morgue (which was still unidentified), somebody entered the morgue, stole the body and murdered the morgue attendant in the process. The story is really about Crane’s quest to find the dead body, to identify her, and to solve her murder mystery (while the police ruled her death a suicide, Crane soon realized it is a murder faked to look like a suicide). Right from the start, however, Crane ran into two powerful gangsters (Mike Paletta and Frankie French) who are enemy of each other but both are united in the goal that they both want to find the missing body and believe Crane has it. It turns out they believe the dead woman is Verona Vincent, the wife of Mike Paletta, who ran away from Mike to be mistress to Frankie French. Soon after, however, she had a fallout with Frankie and she left Frankie and disappeared. To get the two gangsters off his back, Crane tracked down the real Verona who was living in Chicago under an assumed name and were therefore able to prove to the gangsters that she is still alive. That was necessary because Crane needs to eliminate Verona as the possible dead victim. 

Crane was assisted in the case by two operatives sent by Colonel Black, Doc Williams and Tom O’Malley. The two added quite a bit of atmosphere and action to the book and made the story richer and a lot more entertaining. The Courtland family also has sent representatives who arrived in Chicago to join the investigation, including Kathryn’s brother Chauncey. After a lot of red herrings and twists and returns, Crane finally found the missing body, which was hidden in a crypt in a cemetery. In the end, in a classic dénouement scene, Crane explained to the readers who the dead woman is, why she was murdered, and who did it. It turns out Kathryn Courtland is still alive and well. She has been hiding all that time in plain sight in front of Crane and the police as a Mrs Angela Udoni. Two years ago Kathryn ran away from home and fell in love with a married musician called Sam Udoni. Sam knows Kathryn came from a rich family. When his wife Angela Udoni refused to give Sam a divorce so he can marry Kathryn, Sam murdered Angela in the Princess Hotel (where both Angela and Kathryn were staying). Sam then put Angela’s body in Kathryn’s room and made it look like a suicide. Since Kathryn was staying in the hotel under the assumed name of Alice Ross, nobody were able to trace the dead body, especially Sam replaced all the clothes in her room with nondescript clothes. Since both Angela and Kathryn had only arrived in the hotel the day before, and both women look alike, it was easy to fool the hotel employees to think it was Alice Ross (aka Kathryn) who was killed since the body was found in Alice Ross’ room. It was Chauncey Courtland and an accomplice who were lured by Sam to help with the coverup to steal the body from the morgue because they did not want the body to be identified as Mrs. Udoni, which might throw suspicion on Sam and Kathryn and cause bad press if later Kathryn marries Sam. When the morgue attendant was accidentally killed by Chauncey during the theft of the body, the accomplice (a man called Jackson) became a loose end. So Sam Udoni murdered Jackson. In the end, Crane set a trap for Chauncey and exposed Kathryn’s true identity (during the whole investigation she has been disguised as Mrs. Udoni).