Rating: 2/5

Short summary: A miserable and boring experience. 

More words: I've always been fascinated with how Terry Brooks approaches Shannara. In my opinion, what he did with the first three was quite clever. Having stories that were separate though loosely intertwined let him avoid having a dud trilogy, as each book could stand on its own.

This is the first time he's written a direct sequel to a Shannara book and it was an absolutely miserable slog. The previous book, Scions, had a fun setup with lots of neat little callbacks that served the story well. 

The idea of having an overarching story where everyone gets their own moment in the sun while fulfilling the Shade of the Dark Lord of Endless Babble Allanon's charge is a great setup. I believe that Brooks worked out after the wonky Sword of Shannara that he works better with smaller groups, as was evidenced by how that one picked up toward the end when it got to focus on Shea, Keltset and Panamon rather than having to juggle 10 blank archetypes at once.

He would carry this forward somewhat in his Magic Kingdom for Sale! series, where the first and third were far better with a more narrow focus. This tactic also helped ensure that Wishsong of Shannara was at least palatable thanks to Jair's side of the story which included a fantastic dynamic between him and Slanter. The idea that he would carry this over, though to novelised form rather than within the same story was an idea worth pursuing. Unfortunately, the Druid of Shannara had the best and worst of Brooks rolled in to one. 

The first issue is the general mood and setting. It rains. A lot. That mood carries over to the characters who are miserable, petulant and insufferable throughout the text. That pessimistic viewpoint wouldn't be so bad if there was something worth saying or a point that needed to be brought up. However, it seems only to be utilised in order to give a final triumph or 'aha!' moment. A needless grind that served no real purpose other than to remind you over a very long feeling 400+ pages.

The characters themselves are well realised for the most part, particularly Pe Ell. Brooks has refined his craft to give each character their own voice, even if some voices need to be silenced (I'm looking at you, Morgan Leah). 

[A slight tangent: Truly, Morgan Leah's arc to this point has been the worst. I understand the idea of PTSD that Brooks has tried to feed in from the previous book. Bringing the character down from a jubilant, easygoing adventure-seeker to someone who is now tarnished by experience and life is a worthwhile endeavour...however, it has felt that we've gone from a capable man-child to a petulant baby in record time. I don't know which person in Brooks' life is an insert of the various Leahs, but each has been terrible in their own right]

Reflecting back on the book, it felt like endless descriptions of traversal that brought back Brooks' worst traits from Sword of Shannara. We get it. The city of stone is cold and desolate. The grass has faded. The rivers are flowing. Okay. Fine. Move on and do something with this scenery! 

I could go on, but truly, there isn't too much to say. The reason is that ultimately this is a book that probably could have been an 80-100 page subplot in another novel that was stretched out in to its own thing for over 400 pages that had very little to say or do other than to indulge in each character's mopey nothingness.

I hope the Elf Queen bounces back a little, because this was a very disappointing follow-up.