Rating: 5/5

The Canterbury Tales can be an incredible experience or an incredibly boring experience depending upon your translation.

The Canterbury Tales is often defined as the beginning of poetry in the English language. This is quite a lark as Chaucer didn’t even come up with original material. The stories originate from Boccaccio’s Decameron (F. Scott Fitzgerald owned this book!), John Gower’s Confessio amantis, the Roman de la Rose, the Bible, and unknown sources (or at least according to this 1961 Imaginative Literature I from Homer to Shakespeare). 

In this book, there are 30 pilgrims waiting to journey to Canterbury. They are each to tell 2 stories on the way there and 2 stories on the way back. Chaucer messes this up or can’t count because there aren’t 120 stories, more like 24.

This framing technique—gather round everyone and listen to this tale—is one of my favorites, and the way Chaucer wrote this is that on steroids. Also, as someone who enjoys reading out loud, there are a lot of opportunities for accents, colds, drunken characters with such a variety of pilgrims. 

Many of the stories are laugh-out-loud funny, and many have a little moral to them.

Chaucer took 15 years to write this book, and it is written using a rhyming scheme.

Now, I will confess. I have two copies of this book: one a selection of passages in the Harold Bloom book, The Best Poems of the English Language, and the full book as a Penguin Classic where Nevill Coghill was so good as to translate the poems into Modern English.

Ugh. Double ugh! The Harold Bloom passages are incomprehensible. 

The Penguin Classic was extremely easy to read compared to the Harold Bloom passages. So if you are struggling with Canterbury Tales, you might want to consider another version.

My three favorite stories are 1) The Knight’s Tale 2) The Clerk’s Tale (this is essentially a Bible retelling with a female character as the hero) and 3) The Manciple’s Tale (because the moral is interesting and at the same time The Manciple is subtly calling out The Host).

Please note there is one story which is antisemitic, The Prioress’s Tale. This is not appropriate, but there usually is at least one wildly inappropriate person in a group of 30. Usually more than one these days.

The Green Light at the End of the Dock (How much I spent):
Softcover Text – $9.85 on Amazon
Audiobook – Audible – 1 credit (Audible Premium Plus Annual – 24 Credits Membership Plan $229.50 or rough $9.56 per credit)

Connect With Me!
Blog Threads BookTube Facebook Insta My Bookstore at Pango