Rating: 5/5

This is the second sequel to Melody Logan's story, so don't read this book unless you've read Melody and Heart Song first. Though no one else really thinks it's a good idea, Melody travels to L.A. to find her mom and figure out why her mom faked her death and abandoned her. She also hopes to bring her mother home to Cape Cod. 

I'm surprised I gave this book 5 stars because I really thought I'd be giving it 3 stars, but I was so engaged I couldn't put it down and ended up skipping the gym as a result. 

Trigger Warnings: Melody almost gets raped twice. 

What I thought as I was reading: I wanted the mom to have more success in her acting career. Even though I thought Haille was a terrible mother, I also sympathized with her wanting to pursue her dreams, though I was never truly convinced she was so interested in acting and more that she thought acting was her way to fortune and fame. 

Although I've considered pursuing acting myself, I couldn't help but pity all the aspiring actors/singers/dancers living in the Egyptian Gardens. I think it's great to chase your dreams because you'll regret not doing so, but still, there was something sad about all those individuals. I wonder how long they all chased their dreams before giving up. Maybe Melody was right saying that they were living in a fantasyland. 

I felt like the Logans were being picked off one by one... First, Laura, then Uncle Jacob (I knew he'd likely die after the first heart attack), Grandma Belinda, and Grandma Olivia. I was satisfied when Olivia died since that meant that Cary and Melody could be together, and Melody didn't have to go to some stupid prep school before going to college. I did wonder what Melody wanted to do career-wise and wish that could have been included in the epilogue (it seemed like she was going to support Cary with his business), though I did like hearing that she and Cary planned to get married. Tbh, I didn't think they'd be endgame since Melody would always say how she said "I love you back", believing that was true at the time.