Rating: 4/5

In 1979, Czech playwright and human rights activist Vaclav Havel went to prison for four years. This book collects some of the letters that he wrote to his wife Olga from prison during that time. 

The letters I found the most moving were those in which he described his life in prison, at least as much as he could. The prison authorities put restrictions on what he could write about and to whom. He writes about memories, about his plays being performed, about family matters, and about the health issues he developed. He'd been sentenced to hard labor, so for a while, his job affected his physical well-being--he complains about his elbows hurting, at times his whole body hurting. For a long time, the only "entertainment" he had were letters from Olga and his brother, Ivan. He has a lot of time to think, even when he's working. Visits from Olga and Ivan are few and far between, and he writes with joy after each one. 

About halfway, Havel begins to write what he calls his "meditative" letters. He explores philosophical and existential issues, and explores his own involvement with theater. These meditations begin to take over until those are the only kind of letters he writes--at least of those included in this collection. Sometimes the prison authorities decide not to send on his letters or not to give him letters from Olga. They tell him that one rule or another had been broken by what was written in them. 

Havel's philosophical musings in the last section of the collection address human existence and how humans can end up behaving in evil ways. He uses non-spiritual language writing about what I view as spiritual ideas--where humans come from, why humans exist, what are the challenges humans must meet, and the role of responsibility in all of it. 

These letters are not an easy read. I've always been a huge admirer of Havel and the human rights work he did in Czechoslovakia. He betrays his doubts about his own existence and purpose, and if he has maintained contact with Being and its voice rather than focusing only on existing in the world. Havel has a great deal to say about what is happening today in the world and the rise of authoritarianism and oligarchies. He lived most of his life under communist/totalitarian rule, but never stopped opposing it.

I recommend this book to readers interested in Czech history, politics, and of course, Havel himself.