Rating: 2/5

First of all I’m one to talk with a not so common name like mine but boy! This authors name was suggestive ! I’ve only just come to accept that this was written by a man .

The book: hmmmmm . weeeellll … generally it isn’t boring or anything , I was pretty into his hunting down witnesses , particularly the ways in which they were being ‘sworn to secrecy’ and I enjoyed the chase but I did feel it was a tiny bit too convenient , too easy you know ? 

About Robert himself -I really didn’t care about his life . It was boring and just unpleasant . Once again enough with the sex , not only that but he and Susan suffered from insta-love . A glance and bam 💥 . There go the fireworks . Nowhere did I see any development between the two or anything to show their so called love and growth . Any time they were together it was just sex , barely a single dialogue or conversation between the two . It’s cheating to describe their marriage as perfect or whatever and not show how . Sorry I was not convinced .

From the climax onward it felt a littttle rushed . I don’t feel like I know Robert well enough when almost the whole book is written in his perspective.( Also is there a thing with Robert’s and thrillers ?) He wasn’t a bad author but I was kinda irked by the Sci-Fi , I don’t hate it but the way he did it in this book came out real silly . I’m also not in to the stereotypical way . Maybe sci-fi or conspiracy is just not his thing .

I saw that some of this authors fans didn’t really like this book in particular so … not judging the author quite yet but I think it says something . I don’t want to write this guy off so soon , so I’m not completely opposed to him but I certainly wouldn’t go out of my way to buy a book of his or keep it somewhere higher up in my TBR . If you have limited options like I did then I guess this would do . I did expect worse though .

Turns out Dan Brown got inspiration from this here book . That’s a topic for another day . It was an interesting experience , full and rich due to the copy I was lent . The book had LITERAL bullet holes and maybe two or so missing pages 😂 . A real thriller huh!

Excerpts :

Olga: “Her tast for chocolate was to cost Olga her life” . 
ACTUALLYYY. Death by chocolate ? Hmmm I might just sign up. Plus she’s a reader . My kinda girl 

“It’s being run by a bunch of bleeding hearts who are giving the store away . This country needs nuclear power , but the damned politicians are stopping us from building new plants . We depend on the damn Arabs for oil”
Yeaaaahhh . Honorable mention! Seriously , thank you very much , I’m flattered . Has stop changed in meaning or is it just me ? It’s iron isn’t it ? Look where our oil has gotten us due to men like these .

Note: excuse the rushed and poor writing , i had no timeee
Edit: you were worrying about the wrong review