Rating: 4/5

This book was recommended to me by a bookstagrammer I follow on my Instagram with not much but an insistence that it would be up my street to go on.
I have to admit, he was right 😊
Rule of the Bone was written right in the grunge phase of my youth and I wish so much I'd known about it then as I think I probably would've read it a hundred times by now.
The protagonist of the story is a 14 year old named Chappie, who tells his tale at speed in its speach but slowly in its detail, almost as if the major events of his life were of no consequence or at least of no less importance than the little details he encountered every day.
The narrative doesn't have much structure, and you read as if you're listening to a typical teenager speak in one long ramble with barely a pause for breath which I have to admit, wasn't what I'm used to and took a couple of pages to get used to, but was perfect for building the character and getting a picture of the kind of guy Chappie is.
Russell Banks manges to brilliantly show the other side of life, the people that slide between the cracks and the way the world looks to those that live it in a very matter of fact way. It doesnt necessarily bring you out in sympathy for Chappie in particular, but just says 'this is the way it is' and merely asks you to come along for the ride cos really, this kid ain't all that bad. 
And you do, and you find yourself witnessing the journey of Chappie's self discovery through his tenacity and resilience that even he doesn't know he had. 
I wouldn't exactly say that the reader is rewarded with the full chrysalis-style transformation ending that you'd expect but that's not a bad thing, it wouldn't be in the style of the book to do that, but the fact that you know Chappie is gonna do just fine is enough. It's like feeling contentedly full rather than over stuffed.
On the whole I'd recommend Rule of the Bone as one of those cult classics that should be read at least once. You don't have to love it but it will definitely make you think.