Rating: 5/5

I got my first copy of IT when I was 10 years old. The checkout counter loomed above me and the cashier said "You don't want to read this." I assured her I did and she reluctantly let me purchase it. I'd already seen the mini series with Tim Curry and was fully prepared for scares after devouring dozens of Goosebumps and Fear Streets. When I got home, I marveled at possessing a book of such girth.

Mom was not happy with my reading selection in the same way she wasn’t happy with me reading Goosebumps. The cover art was "ugly" and, furthermore, anything but the Bible or Little House on the Prairie was trash. Nevertheless, she still awarded me a penny a page for every book I read. I don't think she connected the dots that a book with a clown on the cover was any different than other scary kid titles like Beware of the Purple Peanut Butter.

With the fantasy of receiving ten bucks after reading this 1000+ pager, I got started. It wasn't easy. Adult minds were still foreign to me and experiencing this blend of childhood and adulthood through King's insurmountable character development was startling. Significantly more startling than when Georgie gets gobbled up. I couldn't believe all the crap adults had to deal with. How would I end up in 27 years?

I stopped reading around page 250 after Beverly Marsh was introduced. The scene was familiar from the movie, but I realized even then that movies can never fully depict domestic abuse. Of all the scary scenes from IT, Beverly's escape from her husband remains the most horrifying. At this point I basically assumed that married couples were eternally happy. Yet here was King describing this very real scenario of a woman trapped in her past, simultaneously turned on and terrified by her spouse. Reading it at 10 didn't scar me, it just made me feel older and wiser. I put the book down then only because it was draining to learn so much. Like reading a textbook.

Fast forward 11 years to when I'm 21, about to graduate college and about to move 1,000 miles away from my family. On a subconscious level, I think, I realized it was time to revisit IT. Now, at this point in my life, I needed a textbook. I needed to know how to fight demons and escape the past, but not forget about it either. I needed to learn how to survive. That summer I didn't stop at page 250. I read it to the end, and it was exactly what I needed.

Funny - now, nearly 11 years after that - I feel IT's calling again. The new movies are okay, but they aren't a substitute. They provide a good gist of what's in the book, but I feel like King's text actually holds the secrets of the universe. Reading it every 11 years might just be the tradition I need. Because let's face it, I need IT in my thirties just like I needed IT in my twenties, just like I needed IT at ten. Our minds change, our bodies change, but so much remains the same.