Rating: 1/5

This was not a good read. There probably will be spoilers in this review. 

This was basically r/niceguy the novel. The main character is so incredibly unlikeable. William is sex-obsessed, oblivious, selfish, and misogynistic. He only likes women for what they can give him, for what they look like and their sexual appeal. He is also aggressive and violent. He literally knocks over Sarah’s refrigerator when she breaks up with him. Like ?? For what? When he is upset, he destroys things. There are multiple occasions he thinks about physical violence towards Sarah and Samantha. 

There are occasions of sexual assault that the book wants me to think is romantic, like when Sarah was asleep. Can William only get off when girls are sleeping??

William also stalks Sarah. He wants to “get the last word” or “show his strength”. He yells things outside her window after she’s made it clear she needs space from him. So weird. It totally reminded me of r/niceguys because despite all this, William and his mother refer to him as a “great” or “nice” guy. William blames everything on Sarah.

There was also a really weird sequence of gay panic that William was having, which would have been more understanding if William actually ended up being gay or something. Then, this obsession with the F-word and being “manly” would make a bit more sense. Even his weird anger and hostility towards outwardly LGBT people could be explained away as internal homophobia. But, nope. We have William’s downhill spiral and then it’s never really brought up again. Add homophobic to William’s list of undesirable traits. 

William didn’t really go through any character development by the end of the story. He is still rather selfish and he still sees women as objects. I don’t understand what the point of this story was. If William did all of this awful stuff then changed, then yeah, I would understand why that stuff was in the book. But, from what I read, William doesn’t change.

I have had this book on my book shelf for years and wanted something quick to read—I would not recommend this book for anyone, unless you’re a guy wanting to know how exactly not to behave.