Rating: 5/5

Isabella Bird was an English gentlewoman who first came to Colorado on her way back from Hawaii in 1873. In this collection of letters Bird wrote to her sister back home, she details her experiences as she rode over 700 miles, usually alone, though the mountains that fall.

This is a spectacular gem of a book. Bird is an astonishingly brave person to undertake such a journey through an untamed landscape as winter was rapidly bearing down, but that she did so as a woman at that time is truly inspiring.

First and foremost, this is a love letter to the landscape she discovered here on her journey. She paints vivid portraits of the awe inspiring beauty in prose that could fairly be described as purple. Yet reading it, I couldn't help but feel every word she penned was justified by the unbridled majesty she was attempting to capture.

Bird is no romantic and she also grimly describes mountainsides devastated by mining operations whose barren legacy we still live with today. In addition, she gives us images of early Cheyenne and a downtown Denver crowded with horses and pelt shops, not to mention my own town of Boulder, which she described as a "hideous collection of frame houses on the burning plane." (Oh, if she could see us now!) 

Bird's letters provide a gripping glimpse into what life in these early mountain pioneer communities was like. She spent much of her time in Estes Park when it consisted of a dude ranch and a dozen people. Though Bird was a wealthy woman, money was of little use when there were no fancy hotels to spend it on, banks were closed due to financial panic, and she was trapped by a storm for days on end in a log cabin with unchinked walls in sub-zero temperatures. At one point, she discusses how the hunters and trappers she shared the ranch with were so afflicted with cabin fever they obsessed themselves with attempting to keep her ink from freezing.

As Bird traveled throughout the region, her reputation as the crazy English horsewoman began to proceed her and the rough and tumble men of the region accorded her a grudging respect. It was one that was clearly earned from events like the time she was caught riding on the plain in an ice storm. The blowing crystals stung her face, bringing tears to her eyes that froze them shut. She survived the storm with frostbite on her hands from constantly having to deice her lashes.

It was undoubtedly adventures like this one that allowed her to earn the respect and confidence of the notorious Mountain Jim. He was an Indian hunter and animal trapper with a whiskey problem who guarded the entrance to Estes Park. Over the course of her time there, Jim served as her guide on several trips, and ultimately confided in her the tortured tale that led to his perception of himself as a fallen man. 

The insight Bird offers into characters like Jim, as well as other settlers she met who came for the "cure" offered by the high, dry climate, is fascinating. Not unsurprisingly for the time, her attitude towards the few Native Americans and Chinese laborers she observes is openly racist. But although she clearly prefers the refinements of her English race over white Americans as well, her observations of the differences between her homeland and this rowdy mountain culture are very thoughtful. 

I closed this book with a much greater understanding of the history of my state. In the wake of the floods that have devastated many of the regions she writes about, I was also grateful to be able to see anew the mountainous backyard I have come to take for granted through the eyes of a woman who was well traveled enough to know that there is no place else like it on earth.