Rating: 4/5

The Time Machine by H.G. Wells

This classic novella was immensely readable. It’s clear that H.G. Wells had a brain the size of a planet, with an imagination to boot. Written in 1895, Wells paints an incredible picture of a dystopian society in the year 802,701. 

A man in Victorian England, referred to as the Time Traveller, creates a machine that he says, can travel back and forth through time. He mentions this to a small group of learned men (non-inclusiveness, noted)– who are dubious. So, one quiet evening he pulls his lever, and off he sets.

Anyway, he returns from the year 802,701 to a houseful of gentlemen and explains where he’s been. Even though he was only away for less than three hours. He describes a warm world (note – climate change deniers), lush with vegetation, and populated by wee childlike creatures called Eloi. These easily distracted, physically weak beings spend their time playing, frolicking, eating, and sleeping. They’re also a bit dim. 

I love H.G. Wells’s explanation here – due to the lack of conflict, the ease of life, and the bountiful supply of plant food – they have no need for strength, intelligence, and guile. That explanation works for me.

But there are other human descendants – the Morlocks, this lot live underground and seem to be subservient to the Eloi. They’re an ugly lot and to be frank, quite angry.

The time traveller has his machine stolen, and he needs to find it to get back home. 

His experiences during his time – are beautifully portrayed by Wells. I could almost see this beautiful world.

What I do know:	

The world will end, and I’m glad I won’t be around to see it.

The relationship between the time traveller and the childlike Eloi female “Weena” made me queasy.

The ‘end of time’ scenario (as our Traveller does venture even further into the future) – isn’t nice at all. Think about it, our descendants will have to deal with that.

What I don’t know:
	
Wells only concentrated on future time travel, I wanted to see our Time Traveller grapple with Neanderthals, Sabre Tooth Tigers, or Mammoths. But, alas, no cigar.

What “Weena” saw in our Time Traveller, I will never understand, he was twice her size and communication was tricky.

A depiction of “Weena” in an old sci-fi movie of this book. “Weena” is the woman in pink. How convenient

A more realistic depiction of “Weena” – see what I mean?.......just saying.

An unfortunate looking Morlock, dancing to Thriller - no wonder they were an angry bunch.

An entertaining read.

 4 Stars