Rating: 4/5

Baby barn owl Plop doesn't want to be a night bird, 'Dark is nasty,' he tells his mummy. She tells him that he doesn't know that for sure, so he ought to go and find out.

Mrs Barn Owl, therefore, sends him down from his nest to ask a little boy about the dark. The boy is waiting for the fireworks to begin and he tells Plop that dark is exciting. When Plop gets back to his nest he tells his mummy what he has learned but he still says, 'I still do not like it AT ALL! But I will watch the fireworks if you will sit by me.' So they watch the fireworks together.

The next morning, after his mummy has been hunting, she sends him down to an old lady sitting in a deck chair to ask about the dark. The old lady tells Plop that dark is kind as she can forget how old she is and can sit and remember all the good times. Plop returns and tells his mummy what the old lady had said but he still insists that he doesn't like it AT ALL.

That evening Plop is brave and flies down to a boy scout who is guarding the camp-fire and he tells Plop that dark is fun as he and the other scouts sing around the fire; Plop stays with them until the fire has sunk to a red glow and then he flies home. The same conversation as before ensues with his mummy; although the scout says dark is fun, Plop still doesn't like it AT ALL.

Next Plop flies down to a little girl who tells him about Father Christmas and gives him a sock to hang up on Christmas Eve and she tells him that dark is necessary because of Father Christmas coming. Plop goes home tells Mrs Barn Owl the news but still doesn't like the dark AT ALL but he does decide to hang his sock up when Christmas Eve arrives.

When his parents are out hunting the following day, Plop flies down to see a man with a telescope who tells him that dark is wonderful as when it is dark he can see lots of stars in the sky and he points out such as the bright Pole Star and Orion the Great Hunter along with many others. He returns to tell his parents how the man thinks dark is wonderful but does not repeat his dislike of it.

Finally he flies down to join a beautiful big black cat who takes him exploring up on the roofs and who tells Plop that dark is beautiful. When the exciting exploration is over Plop flies back to his nest. 

He tells his parents of all his experiences and tells them that he has realised that through these encounters dark is SUPER after all ... and then he flies off, in the dark, to go hunting with his parents! Plop has arrived as a true barn owl - he is no longer afraid of the dark!

Paul Howard adds delightful illustrations to Jill Tomlinson's lovely text, which, taken together, are a lovely antidote for calming night-time fears.