Rating: 2/5

2/5

This series, which had been a beloved one of mine as a young adolescent, is complete shit. And I have the right to say that. When I say this, I gave Flowers in the Attic and Heaven full 5 stars, so I'm not just bashing the genre or the romance altogether. No, I am here to give a fair assessment; however, this does not change the fact that the first 3 books of Melody were so boring and cringy that I began to hate myself (shoutout to DylanIsInTrouble). Every time the mere mention of the fiddle made me get so angry because I hated it. And that is saying a lot because why should I care about fiddle playing? Well apparently, I did throughout this series because there is always a constant reminder that Melody is not just a plain jane but has musical talent, aka the fiddle. But of course, we have our modest "Queen" here who blushes terribly at the thought of playing for it at every social event there is in these series. Like who just has a spare fiddle in LA? I didn't even know what a fiddle was until this book, and I dare you to contradict me that many upper social people would also be unaware of this musical instrument. And Imma repeat this again: Cary is a terrible love interest! He is controlling, broody, and everything not right. Also, they try to slide past their taboo relationship by saying they distant cousins and I'm over here like but you guys' grandmas are sisters. That's not really distant...What dumbasses, especially when they say this as a way to think no one will judge them for their relationship, of course people will! But again, we are not dealing with smart characters, people. But the worst of the worst was when dumbass Melody goes to find her "Mommy" like a pathetic little girl (though she 18 and somehow still this naive). Literally over 200 pages were spent with Melody pretending to be her mother's little sis and trying not to out her mother but in reality, this was so dull and boring. Nothing about these scenes with her mother were that memorable. If anything, it was so unnecessary but was used because Melody herself has nothing else to give to this book. AT ALL. 
The only turning point happened in the last 40 pages. This book was so close to being a one-star, but then they revealed the secret about Laura, which will come back in the next book of the series. Sigh, will I read it? Duh.