Rating: 1/5

WARNING: This book review contains spoilers.

I would not recommend the book Confessions of Felix Krull by Thomas Mann to anyone. I can honestly say it was one of the worst books I have ever read.

The book is basically about a pretty boy who gets everything he wants in life. I did enjoy the book at first, but as the story progressed it became less believable and more annoying. Felix Krull, the main character and narrator, grew up in Germany. As a child, when Felix didn’t want to go to school he would pretend to be sick so his parents wouldn’t make him go. Apparently, he was so good at pretending to be sick that he actually gave himself legitimate symptoms such as a fever. I admit that seemed like it was testing the limits of reality, but I believed it for the sake of the story. Felix’s father owned a wine shop, and Felix was a young adult his father’s business went bankrupt. Felix’s family was evicted from their house, so his father committed suicide. This is where the book peaked for me. Felix was distraught when his father died, but his father’s death did not seem to have much of a long-term effect on Felix. If my father killed himself, I would never be the same. Felix just continued to go about his life and hardly mentioned his father after his death. A more realistic situation would be if the tragic story of his father was his motivation for the rest of his life. I was interested to see where Felix’s life would take him at that point in the story. The book had a lot of potential so far, but Mann let me down.

After the death of Felix’s father, Felix’s life continually and quickly took positive turns. Felix’s godfather Schimmelpreester got Felix a job as an elevator boy at a hotel in Paris, and the manager of the restaurant at the hotel, noticing how amicable Felix was with the guests, gave Felix a job as a waiter. As a waiter, Felix continued to charm the guests with his intelligence and extraordinarily good looks. He even befriended a wealthy guest named Louis Venosta. Venosta’s parents thought that Venosta’s romantic interest in a girl named Zaza was too distracting for him, so they decided to send him on a trip around the world to rid him of this distraction. Venosta asked Felix to take the trip for him using his identity so that Venosta could stay in France with Zaza, and Felix agreed.

Now Felix was assuming the identity of a man traveling the world who had more money than he could possibly spend. The first stop on the trip was Portugal. Felix meets and falls in love with a young woman about his age named Zouzou. (Apparently Mann was horrible at coming up with original names.) Zouzou did not want to engage Felix romantically, claiming that all men had a warped perception of what love really was. I was very pleased at this point because Felix finally wasn’t getting everything he wanted. Unfortunately for me, the book ends with Zouzou giving in and kissing Felix. Of course. The whole book is about how Felix EASILY went from being broke when his father died to living luxuriously in Portugal as Louis Venosta.

Other than the atrocious plot, I was not satisfied with Confessions of Felix Krull because it was very wordy. At times, there would be many pages where there was no dialogue. In these wide gaps, Felix would use pretentious vocabulary to describe events in his life that had little connection to the plot. I often found myself wondering what I was reading and why I was reading it.

Please do not read this book. It may make you angry.