Rating: 5/5

Canterbury is one of my favourite cities in England. When I visited there with my wife, on my first journey to Great Britain, the cathedral was every bit as lovely as I had imagined it. Its size is impressive, and at the same time there is a surprising intimacy to the sites associated with Thomas à Becket, the archbishop who was murdered in the cathedral in the year 1170 because he would not knuckle under to King Henry II’s attempts to dominate the Catholic Church in England. And my memories of Canterbury – though that visit to the cathedral occurred a long time ago – came back to me quite strongly on my latest re-reading of Geoffrey Chaucer’s The Canterbury Tales.

Geoffrey Chaucer did for the English language what Dante Aligheri did for the Italian. In a society where Latin was considered the only suitable language for “literary” composition, Chaucer in England, like Dante in Italy, showed that a “vernacular” language of ordinary people could be a suitable medium for the composition of great literature. The road toward the plays of Shakespeare, the poetry of Milton, and the novels of Austen and Dickens begins at Geoffrey Chaucer’s front door.

The Canterbury Tales is for England what Giovanni Boccaccio’s The Decameron is for Italy, or The 1001 Nights for Arabia – a loose narrative frame for a long series of tales that will illustrate the variety of human experience within a society. The frame, in the case of The Canterbury Tales, is that a group of pilgrims are travelling from London to Canterbury, so that they may pay their respects at the shrine of Saint Thomas à Becket (he was canonized two years after his murder).

Nowadays, one can get from London to Canterbury in about an hour and a half; drive your Mini Cooper or your Jaguar or your Land Rover along the A2 to the M2, or take a National Rail train for as little as £13.50. But when Chaucer was composing The Canterbury Tales between 1387 and 1400, the journey took considerably longer. Therefore, a group of pilgrims – including a Knight, a Miller, a Reeve, a Cook, a Man of Law, a Wife from Bath, a Friar, a Summoner, a Clerk, a Merchant, a Squire, a Franklin, a Physician, a Prior, a Shipman, a Prioress, a Monk, a Nun’s Priest, a Second Nun, a Canon’s Yeoman, a Manciple, and a Parson – take turns beguiling the time of the journey by telling stories to entertain their fellow pilgrims.

As each pilgrim proceeds to tell their story, via the medium of a narrative poem in rhyming couplets, the reader quickly observes that each story reflects the employment and outlook of its teller. The Knight’s Tale, for example, is, perhaps predictably, a story of war and fighting. Set in mythological Greece, the Knight’s Tale tells of two Theban cousins, Arcite and Palamon, who are taken prisoner in battle against the Athenian forces of King Theseus. Both Arcite and Palamon fall desperately in love with Theseus’ sister-in-law, the beautiful Emily, and the longstanding friendship between the two turns to bitter rivalry and hatred.

Eventually, a battle for Emily’s hand is arranged, and fate (or the goddess Aphrodite) takes a hand, leaving the loser in the fight to realize the vanity of how he has behaved in the name of love. In a moment of Aristotelian anagnorisis (recognition), the dying man regrets that “I have here with my cousin…Had strife and rancour many a day agone,/For love of you, and for my jealousy.” Knowing that he can never take Emily as his wife, the dying man assures Emily that “I bequeath the service of my ghost/To you,” and tells Emily that she should marry his cousin: “I know not one,/So worthy to be lov’d…That serveth you, and will do all his life.” It is a moving moment.

It is also impressive to see how Chaucer gives voice to women and emphasizes women’s agency and independence of mind. The five-times-married Wife of Bath, in the Prologue to her Tale, is quite frank about her enjoyment of sex, telling the company, “God bade us for to wax and multiply;/That gentle text can I well understand”. She reasons that “hadde God commanded maidenhead,/Then had He damned wedding out of dread”, and declares that “I will bestow the flower of mine age/In th’ acts and in the fruits of marriage”. She even says that she has, within marriage, a right to enjoy sexual pleasure with her husband – “In wifehood I will use mine instrument/As freely as my Maker hath it sent” – and that her husband will have a God-ordained duty to share with her the pleasures of the marriage bed: “I have the power during all his life/Upon his proper body, and not he;/Right thus th’ apostle told it unto me” (pp. 204-07). This prologue leads into a tale in which, once again, the Wife of Bath emphasizes that women have power that must be respected, and voices that deserve to be heard and heeded.

The Clerk’s Tale, told by a pounds-and-pence man, takes a fairly mercenary attitude toward affairs of the heart. An Italian lord, Walter of Lombardy, marries a beautiful and virtuous woman named Griselda. Deciding, because it amuses him, to test her virtue, he pretends to believe that she has betrayed him, and claims to have murdered their son and daughter (!) – though in face, he has secretly sent away to be raised and educated. Demoted to the rank of a scullery maid, Griselda nonetheless bears her sorrows with a humble and meek disposition – until Walter has their grown son and daughter brought back to their court, pretending that the grown daughter is Walter’s young fiancée (!). 

Griselda’s saintly patience is equal to it all; she has only one request of Walter. “One thing I beseech I you, and warn also,/That ye not pricke with no tormenting/This tender maiden, as ye have done mo [me];/For she is foster’d in her nourishing/More tenderly, and, to my supposing,/She mighte not adversity endure/As could a poore foster’d creature” (p. 303).

In response to this expression of selfless compassion from Griselda, Walter’s heart is finally – finally! – softened. “And when this Walter saw her patience,/Her gladde cheer, and no malice at all,/And [although] he so often had her done offence,/And she aye sad [steadfast] and constant as a wall,/Continuing ev’r her innocence over all,/The sturdy marquis gan his hearte dress [prepare]/To rue upon her wifely steadfastness” (p. 303). About bloody time, mate!

The tale ends happily, with Walter and Griselda living happily ever after – and some male readers in Chaucer’s England might have considered it a perfectly suitable expression of women’s “duty” to submit to men’s rule and will, whether just or unjust. Chaucer, however, is not having any of that – for which reason he provides a L’Envoi in which he cautions readers that “No wedded man so hardy be t’assail/His wife’s patience, in trust to find/Griselda’s, for in certain he shall fail” (p. 306). 

And the Merchant (another man of business), who gets to tell the next tale, makes clear that he regrets his own marital bargain, calling his own wife “the worste that may be,/For though the fiend to her y-coupled were,/She would him overmatch, I dare well swear”, and adding for good measure that “There is a long and large difference/Betwixt Griselda’s greate patience,/And of my wife the passing cruelty” (p. 309). One can’t help wondering what aspects of the Merchant’s own behaviour might have provoked all this wifely wrath – some Walter-style attempts at dominance, perhaps? In other words, Chaucer seems to be warning his male readers that his story of Griselda’s extraordinary patience is only a story, told for amusement. Don’t try this at home! 

The Doctor’s Tale diagnoses the human ills of selfishness and immorality, emphasizing how often those who hold temporal power are not worthy of it. The story is of a knight named Virginius, who is raising his daughter Virginia alone; she is of pure disposition, and wants nothing more than to remain a virgin. But a corrupt judge named Appius sees Virginia, lusts after her, and determines that he must have her; and therefore the false judge Appius conspires with a comparably false clerk named Claudius to declare Virginia to be an escaped servant of Claudius, illegally concealed. Appius as judge rules that Virginia belongs to Claudius; Claudius in turn plans to deliver the girl to Appius, for the gratification of Appius’ lust. The doctor emphasizes the intractable nature of a problem that his physic cannot cure – a cruel dilemma – as father Virginius tells his daughter, “There be two ways, either death or shame/That thou must suffer – alas that I was bore [born]!” (p. 403) Daughter Virginia in turn asks, “O goode father, shall I die?/Is there no grace? Is there no remedy?” (p. 404)

The story is a stark and tragic tale on injustice and cruelty sanctioned by corrupt authority; and therefore perhaps it is no accident that the Host goes for the next tale to the Pardoner, a corrupt cleric who talks glibly about how he has conned people out of their money by claiming that he has holy relics that can absolve unconfessed sins, and adds that “By this gaud [trick] have I wonne year by year/A hundred marks, since I was pardonier” (p. 409). His account of his own trickery leads into a tale of three thieves who commit a murder, plot to betray each other in order to collect all of their ill-gotten gains, and end up destroying themselves – all this to reinforce the Pardoner’s theme that “is always one, and ever was; Radix malorum est cupiditas [“Greed is the root of all evil”] (p. 408).

The Monk’s Tale makes clear that, in his religious studies at his monastery’s library, he has focused on the theme of fall from greatness, as exemplified by figures like Lucifer, Adam, Samson, Hercules, Nebuchadnezzar, Balthasar, Zenobia, Nero, Holofernes, Antiochus, Alexander the Great, Julius Caesar, Pompey, and Croesus. By the time we get to Peter of Castile (“Pedro the Cruel,” deposed by his own half-brother, who murdered him in 1369), Peter of Cyprus (conqueror of Alexandria in 1363, killed by his own nobles six years later), and Ugolino della Gherardesca (locked in a tower to starve with his sons and grandsons in 1269, as recounted by Dante Aligheri in Canto XXXII of the Inferno), the Monk’s thematic idea that “Thus can Fortune her wheel govern and gie [guide],/And out of joy bringe men into sorrow” (p. 500) has received more than sufficient emphasis, thank you. 

Small wonder that the Knight asks the Monk to stop – “Ho!...good sir, no more of this”, or that the Host concurs: “Sir Monk, no more of this, so God you bless;/Your tale annoyeth all this company;/Such talking is not worth a butterfly,/For therein is there no sport nor game” (p 506). Even the Host, who tries to take an open-minded approach to all of the Canterbury pilgrims’ tales, confesses that the Monk’s tale was dreary enough to cause weariness rather than a heightened awareness of the vicissitudes of Fortune. 

Prompted to tell something more cheerful, the Monk says that he has nothing cheerful to offer; so we’re on to the next tale-teller, the Nun’s Priest, who tells a much lighter tale of a rooster named Chanticleer, whose “voice was merrier than the merry orgon” (p. 509), and whose pride in his voice almost undoes him when he has a run-in with a devious and hungry fox. The theme of overcoming pride and using one’s wits to survive is told in an entertaining manner in the Nun’s Priest’s Tale – and thus, Chaucer subtly communicates the message that a lighter touch, in the storyteller’s presentation of their material, may help the storyteller to convey their thematic message more effectively.

By contrast, the Parson is quite a downer. His “tale” (more of a sermon, really) is a highly crabbed and grim interpretation of Christianity; and even devout readers of the present day may take issue with some of his declarations regarding how to be a good Christian, as when he remarks that praiseworthy “bodily pain standeth” not only “in discipline, or teaching, by word, or by writing, or by ensample”, but also “in wearing of hairs [haircloth] or of stamin [coarse hempen cloth], or of habergeons [mail-shirts] on their naked flesh for Christ’s sake” (p. 607). I suppose it’s meant to soften the Parson’s harsh advice that the Parson tells his listeners to “ware thee well that such manner penance of thy flesh make not thine heart bitter or angry”; but before long, he’s back to preaching about how there “is discipline eke [also]…in scourging with yards” (p. 607). Self-flagellation? Really? Really?

This review can only hint at the richness of The Canterbury Tales. It conveys the rich variety of life in medieval England, and shows both Chaucer’s poetic gifts and his storytelling abilities. Thinking, now, that it just might be time once again for me to make another pilgrimage to beautiful Canterbury and its impressive cathedral…