Rating: 5/5

Several months ago I finished reading the novella in this collection and I wrote a review. It is below, under the line break. In the time since I have read the essays, though that has taken a good deal of time. I moved to Colombia and left the book in Canada, which delayed reading the last essay by several months, and I celebrated Black History Month, which meant that I set aside all literature by anybody who wasn't black, even if only for a month. There have been delays.

But the essays are fantastic, and I am a little sad to have taken so much time in reading them. Oftentimes they are unorthodox in their structure, and require re-reading of passages to understand just how they are moving forward, why they are moving in that direction, who the speaker is, what they are speaking about. Wolf didn't write for a simplistic understanding of her literature and how it developed - the story of how it developed was complex, and so was the telling of that story. 

It comes with a great wide knowledge, a great wide research into the experience of women in history, and, as a result, is powered by a deep, seething, historical anger. How powerful is her frustration! It makes you stronger as you read it.

Essays are illuminating when they are well-written, when they play with the form, when they add to our appreciation of something that we love. While I would find it hard to argue that they are as stellar as the novella that they are attached to (Cassandra is a 5-star read), they are still very good, and perhaps an essential collection for anybody who wants to write one day. In fact, if I worked for a creative writing program, I would make this book - all of it - essential reading.

------------------------------------------------------

I never expected to become a big fan of the great classics, though I suppose in retrospect my high school admiration for the art of Oedipus Rex was a good indication that I could love the epic poetry of ancient Greece. And somehow it turned out that, with a nudge from a good friend, I did. I loved The Odyssey, and The Iliad is perhaps the best work to give to somebody who wishes to become a pacifist. And then I read a book about the Iliad by Simone Weil and Rachel Besparloff - a small collection of essays that only managed to enhance my appreciation for these great epics.

And now I have read Cassandra by Christa Wolf. 

To say that Cassandra is a wonderful piece of writing I think fails to acknowledge the many remarkable things that Wolf has accomplished in having written it. Here she has taken the works of three incredible ancients - Homer, Virgil, Aeschylus - and discovered a character, Cassandra, hidden away in the margins, and then placed her in the centre of the fall of Troy. She, burdened by the powers of a seer, is witness to the destruction of her city, the murder of her people, the mastication of her body, many years before it is destroyed. She is the prophet compelled to speak out against the war mongering brought to the council by some unknown but trusted young man. She is the woman who is recognized as a traitor, removed from her seat of power in the council and prevented from influencing her father, King Priam, and then thrown in a cellar. She is violently disregarded, ignored, silenced. 

To the detriment of the whole city.

Christa Wolf has written, by taking on the great story of Troy’s collapse, the narrative of women in the western world - that is, to be valuable, intelligent, essential parts of our communities who, for no reason other than patriarchy, have been disregarded, ignored, and silenced to the detriment of our whole selves. She has tied this to the beginning myths of our world - the origins of so much of our defining literature, the beach and walls from which Odysseus set off to return home and, lost for twenty years, recorded one of the great stories of the Western World - a story which has often been called Everyman’s Journey. She is wise in telling us about Cassandra from the perspective of Cassandra. Patriarchy is in everyman’s journey - either as victim or as perpetrator and sometimes as both.

I keep on reading novellas which tell so much in such a short space and continue to be astonished by them. After reading something like Cassandra, which is dense and powerful, intense, and sometimes a struggle, one wonders at why some even bother trying to write books that are more than 150 pages long. How lazy some novelists are, taking so long to tell so little, one thinks. Of course, this isn’t possibly entirely true - some novelists need the novel. But books like Cassandra illumine the power of brevity, or declarations, of compelling characters created in very few words. 

This work is nothing short of a classic. The discovery of Christa Wolf will, like my discovery of Gabriel Garcia Marquez only a few weeks ago, surely go down as a landmark in my literary life.