Rating: 2/5

The Curse of the Mummy's Tomb is an adventure story revolving around young protagonist Gabe as he travels to Egypt and ends up in the pyramids with his cousin Sari and his archeologist uncle Ben (don't even get me started on this character's name). 

On the plus side, the last 30-40 pages of this one were mostly good and were tense; they also contain the most shocking violence I've seen in the books I've reread in the original series so far. It's nothing Stephen King level, but I was still surprised to see it in a children's book. But even these pages were increasingly bogged down with repetitive writing and dialogue as I read along, to the point where my enjoyment of these last pages were reduced. 

Gabe is an insufferable protagonist. Literally from the first page of the book he's bitching and whining about how he's thirsty and wants a drink of water, and the first seven pages of this book (the entire first chapter) are just him doing that...whining and complaining about how he's thirsty and his throat is dry...to both of his parents. It astounds me I didn't DNF right then and there. I'm not sure why I didn't. He also keeps saying "outstanding!" to everything throughout the book, which became really annoying. 

Gabe also keeps calling everyone an "Egyptian" when he's supposedly one himself, which makes no sense. It's like being in America, being an American yourself, and calling everyone you see an "American". It just makes no sense and is lazy writing. It's like, no sh*t they're Americans? You're in America? You don't have to say it. 

The book is filled with cookie cutter characters, all essentially the same and all described as having "straight black hair". Some parts of the story are just ridiculous. The kids must have been left alone in the hotel for hours by their guardians at least two or three times, and once, literally right after the two kids were f*cking kidnapped specifically because they were left alone in the hotel and wandered out, the uncle then says he's going to leave them alone in the hotel again for the entire rest of the day! LMAO! It's just insane and makes absolutely no sense. Like, the parents and uncles in this story are completely brain dead. They don't learn anything from their past mistakes. 

The story is laughably repetitive (and bad). Gabe has a shoe whose lace keeps coming undone. Early in the book, he and his cousin Sari are walking through the pyramid tunnels, and he stops to tie his shoe. Sari keeps walking and he loses her. Okay, fine. But then probably no more than 30 pages later the same thing happens! They're walking through the tunnels again, but this time with Uncle Ben, and the kid stops to tie his shoe again and loses them again! How stupid are these children? Incredibly stupid. Goosebumps characters, children and parents alike, never learn. They just keep making the same idiotic mistakes over and over again, no matter how severe the consequences were after doing it the first time. It's painful to read. 

Overall, this one was pretty bad. I'd suggest skipping it, unless you're reading all entries in the original series. Next! 

CAWPILE rating: 

Characters: 4.5
Atmosphere / Setting: 5.5
Writing Style: 4.8
Plot: 3.5
Intrigue: 5.0
Logic / Relationships: 2.5
Enjoyment: 5.5 

= 31.3 total
÷ 7 categories = 4.47 out of 10
= 2 stars