Rating: 4/5

Close Range is a collection of short stories that all take place in Wyoming by Annie Proulx. I found the quality of the stories a bit uneven, despite truly appreciating two of them and, of course, having seen the eponymous film made out of the last one, "Brokeback Mountain." Each of the stories features the natural beauty of Wyoming (a state in which I have never set foot), but all are also brutal tales of abandon and violence (mostly against women and, in one case, against homosexuals.) The writing itself is good and visual, as one would expect in short stories where the writer has to capture and hold the reader's attention for just a short while.

Most of the stories focus on an object which is the center around which the characters pivot during the story: a half-skinned steer, a pair of spurs, pictures of Wyoming governors. My favorite ones in the collection here: 'The Half-Skinned Steer', 'Pair a Spurs' and, of course, 'Brokeback Mountain' which was truly exceptional. Here are some random quotes I enjoyed.

From "The Half-Skinned Steer":
With the lapping subtlety of incoming tide the shape of the ranch began to gather in his mind; he could recall the intimate fences he'd made, taut wire and perfect corners, the draws and rock outcrops, the watercourse valley steepening, cliffs like bones with shreds of meat on them rising and rising, and the stream plunging suddenly underground, disappearing into subterranean darkness of blind fish..." (p. 31)

It was her voice that drew you in, that low tangy voice, wouldn't matter if she was saying the alphabet, what you heard was the rustle of hay. She could make you smell the smoke from an unlit fire. (p. 33)

From "The Mud Below":
It was a hard, fast ride that ended in the mud. He passed a coal train in the dark, the dense rectangles that were the cars gliding against the indigo night, another, and another, and another. Very slowly, as slowly as light comes on a clouded morning, the euphoric heat flushed through him, or maybe it was just the memory of it. (p. 78)

From "The People in Hell Just Want a Drink of Water":
Other cultures have camped here a while and disappeared. Only earth and sky matter. Only the endless repeated floor of morning light. You begin to see that God does not owe us much beyond that. (p. 97)

From "A Lonely Coast":
You ever see a house burning up in the night, way to hell and gone out there on the plains? Nothing but blackness and your headlights cutting a little wedge into it, could be the middle of the ocean for all you can see. And in that big dark a crown of flame the size of your thumbnail trembles. You'll drive for an hour seeing it until it burns out or you do, until you pull of the road to close your eyes or look up at sky punctured with bullet holes. And you might think about the people in the burning house, see them trying for the stairs, but mostly you don't give a damn. They are too far away. Like everything else. (p. 187)

There were times when I thought the Buckly was the best place in the world, but it could shift on you and then the whole dump seemed a mess of twist-face losers, the women with eyebrows like crowbars, the men covered with bristly red hair, knuckles the size of new potatoes, showing the gene pool was small and the rivulets that once fed it had dried up. (p. 198)

The most important story here is that of "Brokeback Mountain" which was a massive hit (3 Oscars) when made into a movie directed by Ang Lee and starring Jake Gyllenhaal and the late Heath Ledger (I had forgotten that he played this role before Joker in The Dark Knight!) I sort of wish I had read the story before seeing the movie, because naturally, rather than conjuring up new images as I read, my mind was busy recalling scenes from the movie as I read the story. As in the film, the story is an unlikely homosexual relationship between two cowboys in the back country of Wyoming, Jack Twist and Ennis Del Mar. 

  He has to be packed and away from the place that morning. Again the ranch is on the market and they've shipped out the last of the horses, paid everybody off the day before, the owner saying, "Give em to the real estate shark, I'm out a here," dropping the keys in Ennis' hand. He might have to stay with his married daughter until he picks up a job, yet he is suffused with a sense of pleasure because Jack Twist was in his dream.
The stale coffee is boiling up, but he catches it before it goes over the side, pours it into a stained cup and blows on the black liquid, lets a panel of the dream slide forward. If he does not force his attention on it, it might stoke the day, rewarm that old, cold time on the mountain when the owned the world and nothing seemed wrong. The wind strikes the trailer like a load of dirt coming off a dump truck, eases, dies, leaves a temporary silence.
 (p. 253)

Out west among cowpokes and rednecks and Bible-thumping ignoramuses, there is, of course, no acceptance of homosexuality. The love between the two men is both passionate and doomed, both know it but neither will fully admit it. Jack is the more reckless of the two, but Ennis holds back. And is unable to look Jack in the face. What Jack remembers and craved in a way he could neither help nor understand was the time that distant summer on Brokeback when Ennis had come up behind him and pulled him close, that silent embrace satisfying some shared and sexless hunger. (p. 276)

At the end of the tale, we return the Ennis' dreams: Around that time Jack began to appear in his dreams, Jack as he had first seen him, curly-headed and smiling and bucktoothed, talking about getting up off his pockets and into the control zone, but the can of beans with the spoon handle jutting out and balanced on the log was there as well, in a cartoon shape and lurid colors that gave the dreams a flavor of comic obscenity. The spoon handle was the kind that could be used as a tire iron. And he would wake sometimes in grief, sometimes with the old sense of joy and release; the pillow sometimes wet, sometimes the sheets. 
There was some open space between what he knew and what he tried to believe, but nothing could be done about it, and if you can't fix it you've got to stand it. (p. 283)

Ultimately, societal norms destroy what could have been a beautiful love relationship between Jack and Ennis. The two men pass it off at first as just a function of their lonely job on the mountain and as a result of the taboo. However, the fact that they continue to see each other for years points to the fact that there truly was love between them. Personally, I am mystified at how homosexuality can provoke such violence in its detractors, some of whom being repressed homosexuals themselves. This story was incredibly important, because it exposed in an non-confrontational way the real possibility of love between virile men and the tragedy of a society that refuses to embrace their relationship. 

This book was a runner-up for the 2000 Pulitzer, won that year by what I considered to be a rather lackluster Interpreter of Maladies which was also a collection of short stories. Not having read Waiting, I cannot speak for that book, but I think that Close Range was stronger than the winner in any case. Proulx is a gifted writer, but I preferred The Shipping News and her description of Newfoundland to this collection of stories about Wyoming. She does have a way of describing great spaces, somewhat analogous, I think, to Pynchon's penchant for describing chaotic, anarchic places.