Rating: 4/5

At first glance, it seems as though Houellebecq never writes about anything substantial. His novels are full of unrealistic sex and judgemental opinion, but by the end of the book, he's essentially predicted the fall of western civilization, the coming Islamic threat, and the continued hostility between the genders. He has his finger pretty much on the pulse but given that his conclusions are not in the spirit of the banal liberalism and progressivism we demand, they tend to get people riled up. But he continues to be the only writer saying something interesting. And he's funny.

There's a part of the book where he describes a woman's vaginal grip as akin to trying to remove a Lego from the hand of a retarded boy. Well, it made me laugh. The story begins with the narrator's (Michel's) father being murdered. It's solved very quickly (dad was fucking the Arab maid and her brother killed him). He uses this time to go on holiday to Thailand with a package tour including several other French people to essentially have sex with prostitutes. When he returns to France, he and Valerie (a 27-year lesbian woman also on the tour) shack up together in Paris. She works for a tourism company and her boss Jean-Yves is tasked with improving the company's tours. The three of them go to Cuba to assess why the resort is failing. Michel suggest he makes the tours more sex based and Jean-Yves agrees. Then they go back to France. Then Valerie wants to retire to Thailand. Then there's an insane ending.

Anything can happen in life, especially nothing.

I really enjoyed the book. It kept making me laugh. Especially the sex scenes which are ludicrous and pure fantasy on Houellebeq's part. Prostitutes love to orgasm apparently. And they orgasm very easily. And women (like Valerie) love threesomes and open relationships (like most women). The whole thing is absurd but immensely fun and laugh-out-loud (reminded me of Celine's Death on Credit when the head teacher's wife aggressively shags little Celine). Pure fantasy but overtly so (and should be read in that spirit). 

Published before 9/11 or the attacks in Bali, Houellebecq predicts the rise of Islam (with more to come in Submission) and once again, as he always does, reiterates that western civilisation has lost its way and produced a method of living that is cold, soulless, and unsustainable. I always find something to like in his work. He is just my level of filth.