Rating: 4/5

Imagine that one day you wake up and discover that you are surrounded by rhinoceros. Your relatives, friends, and colleagues swapped their human form for the skin of those animals. What was the starting point for these strange metamorphoses? Did they happen inadvertently or deliberately?
The unexpected arrival of a rhino in one provincial town makes its inhabitants restless and suspicious. Hot discussions arise around the origins and appearance of the visiting animal.
People argue whether he has come from Africa or Asia. In the meantime, the number of rhinos in the town increases exponentially.

What are the reasons behind these conversions? You might, perhaps, assume that people have become the victims of the powerful spell of some evil magician. Or conjecture that human beings transform into rhinos because of some incredibly rare disease.
However, everything turns out to be way more prosaic. Some voluntarily turn into these thick-skinned species; others start seriously considering making such a fatal step.
But why did the author choose rhinos and not, say, butterflies or fish? Thick skin implies their organic deficiency in feeling others and sympathizing with them. By analogy, the few persons who struggle to keep their humanity should not entertain any hope for empathy on behalf of the converted rhinos.

If I were one of those who tried to maintain their human shape, my biggest concern would be rhino-neophytes. They may want to prove their complete belonging to the group of rhinos with great zeal. The sort of thing that could metaphorically be described by the desire “to be more Catholic than the Pope himself.” 
The reader cannot help but be impressed by the rapidity with which the weight of rhinos in the town increases. This happens, of course, at the expense of human beings.
Today the animals are still a minority, but tomorrow you will see them wherever you go. Those who remain humans, both literally and figuratively, can only watch helplessly what’s going on...

It is difficult to determine where a bifurcation point is located between the two different world orders. At what exact point did normal and abnormal switch places? Regardless of such ‘details’, the rhinos’ power is gaining momentum.
Should the decision to become a rhino be problematic? What prevents the remaining population from abandoning their human shape and merging with the majority? It is a pity that rhinos do not probably possess a sense of humor and are deprived of pleasant recollections. Otherwise, they might be an acceptable choice.

The gist of this slightly Kafkaesque story manifests itself in a famous tale about the “well of madness.” When most people in some imaginary kingdom drank water from this well and became mad, those, who still did not taste this ‘crazy’ water, turned into outcasts of society. As a result, they ended up having to drink from this well, as others had done in order to be accepted by society.

The play by Ionesco also deals with how the quantitative majority starts dictating the ethical standards to everyone. As the proverb goes, “when in Rome, do as the Romans do.” Odds are, the very first rhino predetermined the fate of the town. But the question remains open.