Rating: 2/5

Sometimes when I ride my bike in the grass, on the road or on the sidewalk, I wonder how many ants and other tiny life forms I'm killing and maiming, and it disturbs me. I think I'm being green and earth-friendly by this mode of transportation, yet I am probably responsible for genocide on a massive scale in the micro universe.

Reading Peter Handke's "mini epics" in Once Again for Thucydides put me to mind of this personal observation because the 17 short pieces in this book attempt to isolate, coolly observe and describe rituals and everyday phenomena of the human and wider natural order that are typically ignored or unobserved by otherwise distracted humans. 

Handke essentially attempts to turn pictures into a thousand words as he contemplates the ostensibly ordinary on travels mostly through Europe and Asia in the late 1980s: the loading of a cargo ship in Dubrovnik, formations of pigeons and the artistic flourishes of a shoeshine man in Croatia, distant thunderstorms on a Yugoslav isle, the falling of snow on Hokkaido in Japan, a Greek man's futility in trying to capture his escaped parakeet, an inexplicable procession of citizens in a Macedonian town, a Catholic oil ceremony in Spain, a luminous night of glowworms in Italy, a thawing stream in the Pyrenees, the movement of cloud formations around a mountain near Salzburg, impressions about a beloved ash tree in the center of Munich, the barren aftermath of a French forest fire, etc.

The universality of the things observed make the actual locales themselves somewhat anonymous. These are mostly things that could take place anywhere. It turns the idea of travel diary on its head a bit.

I had mixed feelings reading this collection. An essential question that nagged me was whether Handke, by taking a microscope to typically ignored actions and things (such as the loading of a cargo ship), succeeds in making these things any more interesting or any less boring. Another basic question I pondered was: Just because someone writes something and writes it well, does that mean it's a worthwhile endeavor to read it?

These concerns arose partly because I couldn't decide if Handke's observations were clinical, poetic, or philosophical. I hardly detected much attempt by Handke to overlay much philosophic meat on the scenes he described, and yet, there is a certain wisdom and interpretive POV inherent in the way he describes things.

I wondered what the tie exactly is supposed to be to the historian Thucydides. If Thucydides' histories were like Peter Handke's diarist essays we might know a lot about how people milked their cows in ancient Greece but not a whole hell of a lot about the Peloponnesian War.

Needless to say, the glum Austrian Mr. Handke is not a laugh riot, and what philosophic pondering there is to be done is mostly left to the reader.

There are themes to be gleaned from all of this; about how one travels life's path, for instance, and about how the markings of those paths are as impermanent as we are.

If there is any tie to Thucydides at all, it might be the fact that little has really changed about the basic human condition since the days of the Greek historian. People go about their jobs and travels, and nature's cycles continue as always. All of this might be interesting to read about and contemplate if not for the fact that it has all been written about and contemplated in far more compelling and thought-provoking fashion by scads of other writers. There's nothing new to the mix here to make this book memorable.

The text could have added value as a teaching tool for showing students how to pen basic, minimalist descriptive word pictures.

There were a few times while reading this that I was put to mind of Chris Marker's masterful 1983 essay art film, Sans Soleil, especially in the way Handke used image memories from previously visited places to comment on observations of the place being visited in the here and now.

Reading this, I wasn't requiring or expecting a narrative skeleton for these observations, but I think I would have liked a little more philosophical meat. As it stands, it's a sparse diary, an exercise, more academic than heartfelt. Maybe this is the way Handke always is. More readings will tell. This is my first encounter with him, and, I suspect, possibly not the best place to start.

If there are deeper meanings in these "stories"--for lack of a better word--I'm missing them, clearly.

Maybe next time Handke could write observations about things seen, or unseen, while riding a bike. But he can't have my first paragraph. That's mine.