Rating: 4/5

Synopsis
This book follows the story of Commander Robert Bellamy of US Naval Intelligence who is suddenly asked to handle a very secret mission with the help of no one. The only thing Robert knows about this mission is that there's an accident with a crashing weather balloon that carries sensitive military information in Switzerland. Therefore, Robert needs to find all the witnesses so that they can all be sworn to secrecy. However, things start to get weird since then. All the witnesses admit that they see a UFO instead of a weather balloon. After finding out that each of them dies suspiciously, Robert realizes that he is now the last target of this whole operation.

Review
Well, the synopsis, along with my mom's recommendation, was the reason why I was intrigued in the first place. I wasn't lying when admitting that I wasn't a big fan of mystery books (I mean, I still give some a try now and then, but that's that). So when I started picking up this book, no matter how promising the blurb might sound, I set my expectations low. And much to my surprise, I ended up enjoying it quite much. I binge-read 80% of this book in a day because I was very hooked.

This book was divided into two parts: the one where Robert tried to locate all the witnesses and the other one where Robert became the target. It was fast-paced, yet honestly, I was a little bored at first. Fortunately, things started to get more captivating when the 'hunt' began. But you see, Robert didn't know anything about where to begin or the number of the witnesses. Either he was too lucky or too clever, I couldn't decide. He seemed to get all the right hints and clues, none of them was misleading. Was it good fortune or intelligence? I really couldn't say.

Some of the twists in this book were unexpected, while some weren't. I liked the fact that Robert had to go (almost) around the world to complete this mission. A short explanation about each of the witnesses was also told here and there, which made them more memorable and interesting. On the other hand, Robert's backstory was another favorite part of mine, especially when his ex-wife, Susan, was mentioned. It was unfolded in the form of flashbacks and I felt truly sad for both of them. 

Regardless of how easy the hunting might seem, the first part of this book was still enjoyable. I also liked the fact that Robert could take advantage of all the sources around him to indirectly help him in this mission. He was actually a good spy. A very good one, to be exact. He proved himself a lot in the second part of this book where instead of being the hunter, he was the prey. So yes, this part was absolutely my favorite. It was very thrilling that my heart raced faster and faster every time he was almost discovered.

In conclusion, the plot of this book was actually very intriguing. The storyline was also written cleverly with a touch of sci-fi and true facts. There weren't too many main characters though, so we could spot the bad guys pretty easily. However, I was a little bit disappointed by how the ending turned out. It seemed to bring the conflict to an abrupt end, and I still had a lot of unanswered questions about Susan, Monte Bank, and... some other things (I can't say too much without giving away some spoilers). One thing you should know, though: I was pretty confused about how did some of them fit in this whole plot.

Overall, I found this book enjoyable with its thrilling mystery and unexpected thriller. I really like the premise of it, even though I still think that the ending could've been so much more than that. I also recently found out that The Doomsday Conspiracy was the original inspiration behind Dan Brown's thriller fiction works — wow, right?

For more reviews, visit my blog talenthusiast.blogspot.com