Rating: 5/5

Jews Are Bustin' Out All Over

Why should the Jews live in a narrow, religious world bound by myriad restrictions when all Europe is moving towards an industrial, modern future ? On the other hand, isn't leaving the guidance of one's own tradition, and walking on thin ice towards material and emotional satisfactions frought with dangers and fears ? As usual, Singer asks big questions in his novel and answers ambiguously. Readers have to look within themselves to divine the answers to such questions. Materialism and individual freedom offer rewards, but then so do spirituality and family ties.
 Calman Jacoby takes over the management of a Polish manor after the failed revolt of 1863. He rapidly makes a success of it, becomes a capitalist, and willy-nilly moves away from maintaining the minute observations of Jewish tradition. Yet, he regrets this, he struggles to remain honest. When his wife dies, he marries an independent woman of dubious morals with an eye for the main chance. His eldest daughter marries the ambitious-but-traditional son of a local rabbi. Amother marries a no-count nobleman---son of the original manor owner---and lives a miserable life as an apostate to Judaism. Another marries a holy rebbe, leader of a Hasidic sect. The fourth weds a man who chooses rationalism and science over the mysticism and superstition of the village Jewish community. She cannot keep up with him. How can Jacoby deal with the stress of such transformations in traditional Jewish life ? While some men strive in the world of old, Talmudic scholarship, serving as guides to the gullible poor, speak only Yiddish, and shun contact with outsiders, others begin to shave, wear European clothing, eat non-kosher food, and associate with women outside the family. New political ideas appear and shake old certainties. Singer traces the tensions and upheavals in families who live in times of rapid transition from one kind of society to another.
 Chinua Achebe's "Things Fall Apart" and other novels can be related to THE MANOR, but a lot of African and Asian literature deals with the same theme, as does the literature of Native Americans. Singer's version is rich, rewarding, and full of poetic description. Perhaps, with so many characters, THE MANOR is more diffuse than some of his other novels, but most of them are vivid and well-developed. As always, he brings the lost world of the Eastern European Jews alive. It will live forever in these pages, as long as people read books or want to know what people once lived and struggled in Poland.

Singer wrote many novels set in different times---from "Satan in Goray" (1600s) to "The Slave" and "The Magician of Lublin" and "The Family Moskat"---as well as "Enemies, a Love Story" set in post-war New York, after the Jewish world was destroyed. THE MANOR is yet another jewel set in the necklace of his work.