Rating: 3/5

Star Wars: Wedge's Gamble book two of the Rogue Squadron Series, was written by New York Times Bestselling Author, Michael A Stackpole. This novel is part of the Expanded Universe , aka, Legends timeline. This tale takes place during the New Republic Era, about seven years after the battle of Yavin.

SUMMARY: New Republic forces (still referred to the Empire as rebels) desire to topple the remnants of the Empire that control Imperial Center on Coruscant. Intel proves that taking the planet will be an enormous challenge with their miniscule numbers, as the defenses on Coruscant appear to be impenetrable by outside forces. A plan is devised that seems utterly reckless and risky. However, despite the baffling plan, Rogue Squadron will do as ordered. Rogue Squadron, led by Wedge Antilles, are to extract dangerous members of Black Sun from Kessel and release them on Coruscant to rebuild their organization in hopes to overthrow the imperial cell, controlled by Ysanne Isard. Rogue Squadron makes the bold move of ditching their starfighters to take to the streets of Imperial Center to gather intel on planetary defenses and specific targets. 

Meanwhile, the Empire is experimenting with a deadly virus that painfully kills the infected victim, by liquifying their insides.. General Derricote is the one heading the experimentation of the Virus, called Krytos. It's designed to target specific species that are non-human. The plan is to direct the Rebels attention to the infected, to drain their funds on the cure of this potential galactic crisis. 

OVERALL THOUGHTS: 
I wasn't a big fan of the the first X-Wing book, Rogue Squadron, but that didn't stop me from being excited to pick Wedge's Gamble. I really don't care for this second book the series either. I have some of the same complaints for this story as I did with the prior X-Wing book; it can be a bit confusing at times to follow the action. Space battles and space ships are cool to see on the big screen or to even play in a video-game, but reading the action... can be a challenge. 

I enjoyed the elements that didn't focus on a lot of action. I liked the briefings and strategic meetings. When the characters and politicians gathered to discuss how they would manage their assault on Imperial Center for example, are the most interesting parts of the story for me. I found myself getting lost in some of the action and getting really bored with it. That said, Wedge's Gamble does make an unexpected shift from space battles to on-the-ground action, which is much easier to follow, but still... a bit too easy to get bored with.

Stackpole introduced a new type of superweapon that is really different for Star Wars. Thankfully, it wasn't some giant, planet basting laser beam... it's a bioweapon, a virus called Krytos. Krytos is a highly disturbing and a brilliant, fresh move for Star Wars weaponry. It's pretty simple, but it sure is sick and twisted. 

Corran Horn is character that I'm really not liking. He's like the Tom Cruise of Star Wars. Gets all the babes, handles all the action, cocky, the best at everything. I don't like how Stackpole added in sexual stuff in the story. It really did feel out of place. It's suggested that Corran has been everywhere, done a lot of things with a lot of ladies... a skanky man for sure. 

Do I recommend Star Wars: Wedge's Gamble? If you like liked the first book, you may like this one. If you didn't like the first book... I say give this one a shot before calling it quits. 

Rating: This book receives a C+.