Rating: 3/5

The Origins of Humanity
19 January 2021

	I’d heard of the Pak Protectors before, but that was in the Ringworld Novels, and they were basically mentioned as, well, being around, but there didn’t seem to be too much detail with regards to them. In fact, I found out about them simply by doing a Wikipedia search. Well, it turns out that this is the book that tells us a lot more about them. Well, not quite because it involves one of them arriving in the Solar System, and us humans getting in contact with it, before proceeding to kill it.

	Yeah, us humans really do like killing things, don’t we?

	Then again, so do the Pak Protectors, and they happen to be pretty xenophobic as well, especially when it comes to Pak offshoots. You see, they believe that there is only one strain of Pak that is legitimate, and all others need to be killed, and unfortunately, Humans fall into one of those categories of ‘all others’. The thing is that we arrived at Earth millions of years ago, but the Tree of Life root that is required to transform Pak from breeders to protectors couldn’t grow here, so we simply evolved differently.

	This is why Niven claims that we lose our teeth, become less interested in sex (which I sort of query because I’ve heard that humans can be pretty frisky for quite a lot longer than he claims that they can, but then again many of us, when we were young, simply could not fathom the concept of old people actually having sex – it just seemed to be way too gross for us), and have our skin start to winkle. That is because we are supposed to be turning into protectors, but we don’t have the root that will push the process further.

	However, other than a heap of exposition, there isn’t much about this book that makes the story all that engaging. It is split into two sections, the first one where they encounter the Pak, who proceeds to turn one of the characters into a protector, and the other characters are trying to learn as much about this creature as possible. The second part involves another character losing four months of his life, and since he inherits a lot of money, decides that the mere stipend that he is being paid is worthless, so he goes on a trek to find out who kidnapped him, and why. Personally, I probably should have worked this out pretty quickly because, honestly, it is bleeding obvious.

	Still, I do quite like Niven’s work, and this is just another one of his many books. However, it sort of sits in his ‘Known Space’ universe, which includes the Ringworld novels (which I have to admit were far better, at least the first one was), and this one just seems to be fleshing out what had come before. However, the Ringworld novels also suggests that we were familiar with the Pak (and I’m not quite sure which book came first, though I could certainly find out by doing a quick Wikipedia search, which I’m not going to do because, well, I’m lazy), so yeah, it can get a little confusing at times.

	However, it’s fairly short, and not a bad read, though honestly, it isn’t anything particularly outstanding either.