Rating: 4/5

WINDMILLS OF THE GODS BY SIDNEY SHELDON BOOK REVIEW

PLOT

Mary Ashley is the quintessential all American woman. She is wholesome, successful, talented and beautiful. She is thirty five years old and married to the accomplished Dr. Edward Ashley and they live in a picture perfect house in Kansas with their two kids. They are a happy and the perfect family. When the new US president Paul Ellison contacts her for becoming the ambassador to Romania, she is pleasantly shocked. She has no beforehand experience for the job and entirely has no idea about it despite being a successful Eastern European political science professor at Kansas State University. 

The US president wants to appoint her and not an experienced diplomat as the first Romania ambassador in his latest people to people program that is intended to improve US relations with Iron Curtain countries. His plan has resulted in adverse reactions all over the world. The communists believe that the president has helped the Allies take over. The West thinks that the communists will start spying freely from now. 

Edward is happy for his wife and a little bit jealous too. Mary turns down the president’s offer. Edward is killed in a violent car accident on a fateful morning. Her husband’s death shatters and devastates her. President Ellison contacts her again about the offer and she is put into touch with Ellison’s right hand, Stanton Rogers. Mary accepts the offer this time and prepares to leave for Romania. She mourns Edward horribly and the job offer helps her to distract her from her memories and thoughts of Edward. 

She meets Mike Slade in Romania and dislikes him immediately because he appears so rough. She can’t get rid of him though although she has requested the authorities. Mary is determined to prove to the world that she is not useless and worthless and perfectly fits the job description despite her lack of previous experience in the field. 

Secret meetings of an unknown organization named Patriots for Freedom are occurring throughout the globe. They want to abort Ellison’s program. People who have figured out how Mary fits into world politics end up being murdered. A successful, dedicated and ruthless hit man from Buenos Aires named Angel is appointed by the Committee to carry out the killing assignments and so far Angel has not failed his tasks. 

Romania becomes unstable and there are signs of an impending coup, making Mary nervous and tense. Mary moves into the residence of the ambassador in Romania with her children and starts a new life. She senses that she is not very popular in her new workplace and that someone is determined to send her back home. She meets a doctor named Louis Desforges and starts a relationship with him because she wants him to fill in the vacant space left by her deceased and beloved husband, whom she misses terribly. 

Can Mary deal with all the political problems thrown her way? Can her children make it in a new land and fight cultural shock? Will Louis be able to replace Edward? Is he the companion Mary longs for and needs? Will Mary and Mike continue to be at odds and see each other eye to eye? Will he always be the deceptive snake in her eyes? 

PERSONAL THOUGHTS

Sidney Sheldon books are usually quick reads and really interesting. You don’t have to think much while reading and this keeps you burning through the pages. There is nothing worthy of keeping in your grey cells long after you have read it though but that doesn’t make it an unworthy read. The pace is fast and the story is expertly laid out to be devoured in one or two sittings. There is not much character development although that is not irksome for me at all. The characters are multidimensional and carry the story forward nicely. 

There are descriptions of the harshness of Romanian life and Foreign Service. The anguish of widowhood experienced by Mary is poignantly and heartbreakingly portrayed. 

At the beginning it seems really confusing because there are so many characters and places and riddles, puzzles and codes. However they subsequently make you get used to them and stick with you and don’t get you puzzled too much. This is the case with all other Sheldon novels if you have read any others and hence it is hardly an issue. 

Short paragraphs and moderately short chapters mean that the book is unputdownable. There is a constant back and forth between a plethora of events and characters. The action elevates to a tantalizing final showdown. You feel the rollercoaster ride that Mary has been dropped into and see everything jumping around fast and change quickly. It is another solid blockbuster by the master storyteller / the master of suspense. 

The book is an absolute cracker and no, you just can’t predict the ending. I’m a huge fan of Sidney Sheldon and this is one of his best works in my opinion. 

His books revolve around pretty and talented women. This book is no exception where females steal the show and men are just bystanders. This is the book for those who appreciate a gripping plot with vivid details, brisk pace that always keep you on the edge of your seat. 

This book has moments of love, helplessness, conspiracies, determination and shocks. The book involves you so much that these very moments and scenes are felt about rather than read about. 

There is no doubt that Sidney Sheldon is a soap opera worthy entertainer. You will be under his spell and this book is a complete whirlwind ride. Go ahead. Enjoy the ride.