Rating: 4/5

“The tips of his crampons were driven in a fraction, barely half an inch — that half-inch would not fail. A kind of bliss came over him as he realized this, a feeling of invulnerability unlike anything he had known. It was as if the mountain had ordained him; he did not refuse it” (130-131).

There is something both awe-inspiring and galling about feats of climbing. When the 2018 film Free Solo came out, I became interested in Alex Honnold and what seemed to be the mixture of daring, courage, and foolhardiness that was driving him to climb El Capitan without ropes or safety equipment. The same impulse appears to have driven him to climb the Taipei 101 skyscraper in January of 2026, also without ropes or safety equipment. That there was a risk of death or serious injury in both cases went without saying. Even with equipment there was the risk of both. And to choose to undertake such a feat, with your family waiting on the ground, hoping for the best, was just an alien impulse. 

Solo Faces attempts, and I think succeeds, to capture something of the mentality that compels climbers to take the risks that they do. Salter elaborates a tension between the impulse to achieve and exceed one’s perceived limits with the sensible impulses of self-preservation and risk-aversion. There are times, during thrilling and beautiful descriptions of mountain face climbing, where Salter’s protagonist, Rand, is seized by fear, arrested by the sudden, clear sense that he could fall. This sense might be precipitated by chopping uncertain handholds from the ice-covered rock face, or by the near misses of debris falling from the rock face as it whistles by like a projectile, or merely remembering climbers who had been maimed or who had died from falls or exposure. 

But then, there is a moment where the fears melt away. Rand is certain that he can do it. He wills himself through the fear and reaches the summit. He is indomitable until there comes a time when the fears overwhelms his will. When that happens, he is left with the impulse to climb but the feeling that he has lost his edge, a kind of psychological vertigo that he struggles to manage.

An enjoyable read with very good, descriptive writing.