Rating: 4/5

The term “utopia” is Thomas More’s most enduring invention. Its meaning is not completely clear, however: is utopia a good place (εὖ-τόπος) or a no place or nowhere (οὐ-τόπος)? Probably both: in a sense, a utopia is a place “too good to be true”. Socrates described the first utopia in Plato’s Republic: an ideal society in the platonic sense, viz. a community in its pure, perfect form, ruled according to the logos only, unpolluted with sublunary, material, human imperfections.

Thomas More borrowed from Plato’s concept and added a few ideas of his own — possibly also, he did some shop-lifting in St Augustine’s City of God (another canonical book, written by another political figure and canonised author). More’s book, for instance, elaborates on the idea of a “philosopher-king” but notes with regret (through his mouthpiece, Raphael) that “Plato was right to suppose that unless kings became philosophers themselves, they would never accept the counsels of philosophers” (Penguin Classics, p. 57). As in Plato, More’s exposition method is in the form of a dialogue: Thomas More (a fictional surrogate of the author) discusses with a sailor about the places he has visited in the New World. We are in the early 16th century, at the time of Henry VIII’s rule over a seafaring England, and in the wake of Columbus’s discovery. The island of Utopia (fictional but presented as real) is situated somewhere off the coast of South America.

Raphael proceeds to describe all the particulars of this Utopian society thoroughly, sometimes in slightly goofy terms: its capital city, its form of government, its laws and justice system, religions and ceremonies, military strategies, its people’s trades, schedules, houses, clothing, values, philosophy — quite similar to Epicureanism, with a strong emphasis on the uses of mind and bodily pleasures. In particular, Raphael makes a strong case against private property: “there can be no equitable or just distribution of goods, nor can the affairs of this world be conducted happily, unless private ownership is completely suppressed.” (p. 70). He also advocates the abolition of money — gold in Utopia is used to make chamber pots (!). Above all, the existence of money is conducive to a “conspiracy of the rich” (p. 167).

Although the wealth inequality More denounced in his time is still and even more noticeable today, the whole idea of More’s Utopia has become extremely foreign to our post-modern capitalistic, liberal way of thinking. Indeed, some things may feel a bit disturbing to the modern reader. First (not a surprise), women are not treated as equals to men; also, slavery is business as usual in the Utopian archipelago. What feels more disturbing in More’s ideal society is his obsession with work and avoiding idleness at any cost (as the famous proverb says: “An idle mind is the devil’s workshop”). People have to keep busy always, and hard labour is the standard punishment for most crimes. Moreover, there is no private property and no room for any privacy either. The life of a Utopian is to be “always in the public gaze” (p. 98). In short, More’s Utopia is a proto-version of Bentham’s panopticon and, in some sense, of our world of constant digital surveillance.

In the centuries following Thomas More’s opus, utopian ideals flourished everywhere. A few years after More, Rabelais published his Gargantua featuring the Abbey of Thélème, where people are invited to “fay çe que vouldras” (do what thou wilt). Sancho Panza, in Don Quijote, will try to rule his island as yet another utopia — and will fail. Then, the Noble Savage will become the flag bearer of utopianism, in Montaigne, Defoe and Rousseau. It will sometimes take a mocking satirical twist, notably with Swift’s Houyhnhnms (Gulliver's Travels) and Voltaire’s El Dorado (Candide). Later still, throughout the 19th century, Proudhon and other anarcho-syndicalists will steal More’s idea and declare that “property is theft!”; Marx and Engels will advocate a classless, communist society; same again with William Morris. Even Nietzsche, with his dawn of an Übermensch, apt to thrive in a godless world — all are utopian thinkers and, in some way, spiritual children of Thomas More.

For better and for worse, utopian ideas really took form during the 20th century, first through the October Revolution; later with the establishment of Nazi Germany. Both attempts ended in utter disaster. Regardless, many more micro-utopias have proliferated since: from egalitarian phalanstères to hippie, ecological, goat-herding, evangelist, gender-based, sexual-behaviour-based, millenarist, post-humanist or nudist communities of all flavours. I’m not even sure at this juncture whether post-modern capitalism isn’t yet another soon-to-fail utopia.

And so, parallel to this swarm of club-utopias, cult-utopias, the ideal of a full-fledge utopian society has nowadays wholly lost its charm and has been replaced with a string of literary dystopias (wrong places). Or should we better say cacotopias, in the same way we talk, regarding music, about euphony and cacophony? At any rate, H.G. Wells, Zamyatin, Huxley, Orwell, Atwood are just a few sci-fi figureheads of this fascinating mushrooming of dystopias.

More’s ideal of being “always in the public gaze” has now become the chilling “Big Brother is watching you” (Orwell) and being constantly “Under His Eye” (Atwood). Let us not forget that the good place is forever and always nowhere.