Rating: 5/5

I grew up around a whole heap of hillbilly boys straight out of the Tennessee hills. Grandmama picked cotton near her whole life. Grandpa died with fingers so gnarled from arthritis after pushing a plow for 50 years that he had to have his youngest boy hold roll and hold his cigarettes for him. My dad, well, he wasn't the hard-working type an let out for Las Vegas at age 17 and bounced from city to city his whole life. Always wound right back there in Ripley, TN though. Needed to be around his people. 

That's actually exactly how I know that Woodrell is as authentic as f&amp;$@. Not for any of the language Megan Abbott laid out in the foreword, or any of the beautiful, plain-speech prose. Just one word authenticates the entire thing. The fact that Woodrell doesn't say family or friends. Doesn't ask "are those your friends?" Or "where's your family?" Nope. He uses the word 'people'. "Where're your people from?" Who's your people?" Hillbilly credibility right there. 

I just reviewed 'Give Us a Kiss' a few days ago and thought it was just so damned awful after having heard so much high praise for Woodrell. So, since its bot like I don't own 859 other books that need to be read, I started Tomato Red immediately after putting down GUaK. Best decision I could have made, by far. This is what I was expecting from the man who is supposed to be the precursor of Bill Frank and Donald Ray Pollock. A damned beautiful, savage and fatalistic masterpiece of backwoods crime drama. 

It's hardboiled as hell. We can trace Woodrell back to Jim Thompson if we want to see where his literary people came from. It's mean and there just ain't no way around any of the meanness. The essence of hardboiled pulp is the fatalism. This has it in spades. There isn't much to say about it except that it demands to be read. It's a classic of American literature, a southern gothic that tells the story of a part of this country that Jonathan Franzen and Jeffrey Eugenides sure as hell ain't gonna write about. Pick it up. Fly through it. Ain't that long. Goes by real fast. But it'll stick with you for a long damn time. 

Grade: A