Rating: 5/5

This Darkover book tells a complete story and could stand alone. It is part of the ongoing history of the planet Darkover, also called Cotman IV. This book lays the foundation for the book Forbidden Tower with the main characters being the same.

Darkover is a guilty pleasure for me. It is 20th century Fantasy/Sci-Fi at its best. Fantasy in that era had not yet attained to all the sadism and graphic torture which became famous with Game of Thrones. MZB has crafted a world of magical wonder yet with the Sci-Fi aspect of other worlds in space. MZB, throughout the series, seems to do a pretty good job of sticking to the rules she has established for the workings of matrix technology, which is basically Fantasy magic. She has laid out a history that makes sense. It's easy to identify with the inhabitants who want to protect their culture. Even so there are inconsistences among over 40 books.

This story was published somewhat early in the development of the series where readers are still getting settled into the lore of Darkover. Andrew Carr is not from this world and as such acts as the vehicle to introduce new readers to the customs and capabilities of the locals. Some of the earlier books do the same, but in this book we get more familiar with how things worked before the Terrans rediscovered the planet, especially Towers and the overworld. It's only a beginning in that sense and more will come with The Forbidden Tower. 

It is confusing for the reader well into the 21st century because many books written later actually deal with so much that chronologically happened earlier. For someone who wants to appreciate the development of MZB and her style, publication order might make sense. I think more people will find chronological order more satisfying, but a certain amount of jumping around doesn't hurt.

This story, which is very short for a novel, and perhaps on the long side of a novella, moves quickly. A lot happens and there is plenty of action. There is some insight into the thoughts of the characters, especially the two men, but it does tend more toward action. There are two romance stories.

I never really understood the purpose for kidnapping Callista without harming her. The story seems to indicate it is to keep her from interfering with the nefarious scheme, but when examined closely, it doesn't make sense.

Mature themes: There is a fair amount of sword fighting, mostly with non-human creatures. In 2021, it is quite mild, but there is some blood. There is no sex, but there are some passages discussing sexual attraction. A woman is held captive against her will, but the story makes it clear that she isn't mistreated except for isolation.