Rating: 1/5

WTF happened to Cussler? Did he go senile &amp; lose his touch or has he always been this crappy a writer? I LIKED "Sarhara", but "Atlantis Found" just SUCKS. After plodding through this book on audio for days, I started to listen today &amp; his hero uses a string to tie 3 rifles together. Then he ties the string to the triggers, runs out of a cave filled with smoke &amp; fire, makes a head shot &amp; then shoots down a helicopter. There is a limit to my suspension of belief &amp; this was just way beyond ridiculous.

The book is completely inane, not just the basic plot, but all the little things that make up a decent story. Characters constantly have conversations to explain what is going on about things that should have been decided long before the action started. For instance, as Pitt is getting ready to scuba dive into a wreck, he &amp; Cox have a conversation about how he should take another diver with him. This is not what you talk about as the man is getting into the water. Such details are discussed well before you even get to the water. 

The characters are all one dimensional. The good guys are so good they can judge how hard to hit a man in the back of the head to get within a pound of a killing blow - seriously, Cussler writes that at one point. The bad guys are so bad that they're always right on the spot, no matter how secretly or fast our heroes move, but they're inept enough to plant a bomb on a plane that blows up after the heroes have landed , but just before they get back into the plane. Why not during the 3 hour flight out? A while later, the heroes are outnumbered 7 to 2, armed with just rocks, while the bad guys have automatic weapons, pistols, body armor, radio headsets &amp; a helicopter with a machine gun &amp; missiles. The bad guys manage to lose. Yuck.

Oh, &amp; no one uses a pistol or any other piece of equipment. No they use a 'model xyz limited edition by So&amp;So company'. Please! If the hero just whacks someone over the head with a pistol, what difference does the model number, laser sight or caliber make? A rock could have been swapped in with absolutely no problem. I think it's supposed to sound cool, but it just sounds like extraneous crap.

I could go on, but I've wasted enough time on this book. I spent 500 minutes listening to it, trying hard to forgive the inanities, &amp; I can't deal with another 700 minutes, so I quit. Cussler owes me 500 minutes of my life back.