Rating: 5/5

"Church people don't use guns, Christine."
"These church people do."

TSOT is a work which is ahead of its time. This is easy to see retrospectively (as it was written in the 1980's) from the vantage point of 2021. Today authors often point out the horrible ironies surrounding extremists who hide their hate behind the term "Christian." But here Dean Koontz is laying out assertions over 30 years before this theme became a prevalent topic in literature.

The Servants of Twilight is a psychologically frightening work--frightening particularly to anyone who has children--about Joey, a boy who is repeatedly threatened by fanatics calling him an anti-Christ and claiming to do God's work in seeking his death, and about his mother and the PI she hires who both struggle to keep him alive. Some readers might prematurely dismiss this plot as one they think they've seen before and recognize, but I assure you that they would be wrong. In fact, Koontz purposely makes ample use of all of our knowledge of famous Hollywood plots about the anti-Christ in order to generate the psychological uncertainty &amp; fear, for which his books are famous. 

The most frightening aspect of this book isn't actually the murderous conspiracy hell-bent on destroying Joey, however--though on the surface that plot impetus certainly generates most of the action &amp; suspense. For me, the real terror this novel creates is the very subtle way in which readers find themselves wondering if Joey really is evil. Koontz understands human emotions masterfully, and as the book unfolds, he plants very subtle images which slowly begin to make readers question what they themselves believe. Charlie, the PI hired by Christine to protect her son Joey, is the first to have these unconscious thoughts:

"Then, as Charlie turned away from Christine, as he looked at back at the boy, something odd happened. Something frightening. For a moment the boy's smooth young skin [...] became translucent [...and] Charlie could see hollow dark eye sockets staring back at him."

Even though Koontz's insane antagonist who wants Joey dead is as detestable as they come, even though readers fully &amp; completely sympathize with Joey and his mother, readers still vaguely wonder in the back of their minds if Joey maybe might be dangerous. This is the terror: recognizing that tiny part of ourselves that could be influenced by cult mentality--recognizing that this isn't a tale of the supernatural, but a tale of extremism as a contagion, one that could definitely, absolutely happen in our world today. 

I often think, whenever I'm reading a Dean Koontz novel, what a shame it is that he had to begin his writing career at a time when critics largely regarded horror &amp; fantasy writing as inferior genres. Let's face it--Koontz's writing isn't typical for best selling thrillers--the writing Koontz completed during his prime is true literature. And I would put his ability to weave motifs, to construct original plot lines which hold a mirror up to society, and to leave readers with lasting thematic insight up against any national book awards winner's. It is only due to the narrow mindedness of academia that his books have not won more awards. I suppose this is a small thing in the great scheme of all of his accomplishments--but it always irks me a bit as his craftsmanship really is the very definition of accomplished. 

On Plot Pacing: 

What I have always loved about Koontz's novels is that the conflict opens up so quickly--he wastes little time on needless exposition before exploding the conflict in his plots. It's nearly impossible to begin one of his books and not immediately read five chapters. This one is no exception. Joey is put in danger on page 3, and by page 4, we understand that the question of whether this danger is paranormal or merely human is one of the cruxes of the novel. The pacing continues to be fast, but appropriately so, and I never felt as though I lacked for background information. Koontz is a genius at filtering in exposition only a tad bit at a time such that it never drags on the action. 

On Character Construction:

As always, Koontz's characters are wonderfully constructed in this novel. I love that he developes his antagonists as well as his protagonists. It's something that really sets him apart from your average bestselling thriller writer. No one in TSOT is flat, and not even the private detective is stock. Villains are always so much more frightening when they are fully realized &amp; made human, and Grace Spivey (leader of The Twilight Congregation) &amp; all of her delusion is just that much more of a threat because readers can certainly see her reflected in their everyday world. 

Overall: 

Yes, even over thirty years later, this novel holds up &amp; is still a fabulous read. I read it in two days as I couldn't put it down. It's rare when horror novels truly retain their ability to thrill over the decades, and I highly recommend giving this one read. 

A word on purchasing a copy:

This is one of three novels in a hardcover collection of Koontz's early work which I am reading. I mention this as these book club hardcovers which contain three of his novels all in one book are such a great deal, and very inexpensive if you can find used copies. There are at least 6 or 7 of these book club collections available, and they canvas his most notable works. You can usually buy one for 5-7 dollars.