Rating: 1/5

I have never written a review this long. 

I could not put this book down...if only because I couldn't wait to finish it and not have to deal with Williams anymore. I cahhnt. I don't even know where to start. Dafuq is wrong with you people? This was terrible. 
 
There is a difference between a reader of philosophy and a student of philosophy. A reader of philosophy is precisely that: a reader; he/she reads books and essays of philosophy out of his/her own volition and out of genuine interest. A student of philosophy not only reads a philosophical work, but studies it, questions it, and critiques every argument (good or bad) within the work. 

I am a student of philosophy, and this book is actually garbage. Literary analysis through a philosophic lens is not equivalent to "a preamble to all of Western philosophy". This is NOT a philosophy book--far from it. This is literary analysis utilizing philosophical principles as explanation. Or, even if it is viewed as a philosophical work, Williams focuses on a handful of passages to make his points. It can also be argued (and argued strongly) that his application of philosophy, in the particular, can just as easily been argued in terms of philosophy, in general, and thereby defeating his assertion that this world of Pooh encompasses all of Western philosophy. 

This book is geared towards the reader of philosophy. Williams stresses a definitive tone throughout the book, always leaving little doubt to the accuracy of his conclusions regarding the ties between Pooh and Western philosophy (there is "no possible doubt" and it is "definitely the case", among others). This same confidence is transferred to his reader, as well, always referring to the "well-informed reader" or the "observant reader"; Williams takes on a well-I-mean-obviously-you-know-that-this-principle-means-this-you-dumbass, Doctorate in Philosophy approach. I suggest that this is for the reader of philosophy because mere readers of philosophy love having their egos wanked: "Um, DUH, I knew that, and everyone else who didn't shouldn't even be reading this book" kind of shit (I mean, if you aren't part of the "observant reader" group, then why would you even continue to read this?), despite having only read, say, one book from Kierkegaard. A reader of philosophy would have or will give this book four or five stars because he/she is full of themselves, and think that points in this book are thought-provoking. Of course the Pooh tales are inherently philosophical, so are many other works of literature: philosophy is inherent in all things. 

I'll give some credit to Williams in that he 1) introduces basic principles &amp; teachings from Western schools and 2) does so within the framework of children's fiction, which makes it generally easier for people to follow. If you're a fan of Pooh, then this book will definitely be a fun, interesting read. And I have nothing against Pooh philosophy scholars; I just think this book is a terrible example of such thought.