Rating: 4/5

Few authors are classified as writers of modern classics in their own lifetime. It is in these terms James Salter (1925 – 2015) was spoken of. I am a fan, on the basis of his prose. Its strength lies in its brevity, power and clarity. His prose style, the protagonists’ attitude toward women and the exhilaration common to his books makes Salter’s writing similar to Hemingway’s. One can compare Hemingway’s love of bullfighting to Salter’s love of mountaineering and his experiences as a fighter pilot.

In this book, and in Salter’s other novels, the focus is upon men rather than women. We observe how men related to each other and how they look upon women. We observe from the masculine point of view. Here Salter tells of men who are mountain climbers. Keep in mind he was a climber himself. This shows. 

The central protagonist, Vernon Rand, is twenty-six, with a failed past in the army. The setting is in the 70s and we begin in Los Angeles, but soon Rand is off to the French Alps--Chamonix, Mont Blanc and the Aiguille du Dru, one particular mountain in the Mont Blanc massif. Later he attempts an ascent of Mount Walker. Initially he climbs with a partner, and it is with him a relationship evolves. Rand saves his life and he comes to save others. With this follows fame and acclaim from other mountaineers. He is drawn in two directions. He is a loner, a man ruled by forces from within, but at the same time he acknowledges that "he had stood at society's edge envying its light and warmth, wanting to be part of it, (and yet) determined not to be." This ambivalence makes him feel very real. It is not possible to view him as a cut-out, a two-dimensional figure.

Few today draw men who so blatantly disregard the wishes of their lovers. Does this make the book dated? Or is it that these women, his lovers, loved the man despite that he treats them with nonchalance. Their attraction cannot be denied. It is interesting to observe the choices the women make. Whom do they choose, him or another? And why? What are the consequences for them and for Rand? In any case, we rub shoulders with people as they really are. Warts are in full view.

Salter magnificently captures what draws these men to mountaineering—its inherent exhilaration as well as its hazards. The sense of freedom and excitement. The competition. All of this is vividly mirrored in the tale. Simultaneously, he captures nature in its ruggedness and in its most elemental. Its beauty and its dangers. One does not need to be a mountaineer to enjoy the book, but an appreciation of hiking and wild life is a plus. 

The interaction between any two individuals can be viewed on a scale with instinct and inner will on one side and social restraints on the other. To what extent are we pulled in one direction or the other? In this book the central protagonist, the climber, feels most comfortable when he is out on a mountain alone, up in the air with the wind in his face; it is then he is “in his element”. All the interactions in this book, both those between men and between one man and one woman teeter on just such a scale. How you come to view the book most probably will be determined by your own position on such a scale. Are you drawn toward individualism? To what extent do you rely on yourself and only yourself when a problem needs to be solved? 

Will and inner strength, which can at times lead to disregard for others, are the central elements of this book. They are also two means by which we battle the forces of nature, thus making the book about this too.

The GR book description is incorrect when it states that the book follows the adventure of Gary, a roofer of churches! The book is not about him.

If you are looking for a book on mountaineering, don’t choose Into Thin Air: A Personal Account of the Mount Everest Disaster by Jon Krakauer; choose this instead.

The audiobook I listened to was narrated by Stephen Hoye. The narration I have given two stars. He pulls out each sentence too long, in an effort to give it ponderous strength. This is not necessary. The author’s words speak for themselves; they have their own inner strength. I dislike the exaggeration. The effect was dreary. I did understand all that was said, so I am willing to say the performance was OK.

****************

The Hunters 4 stars
A Sport and a Pastime 4 stars
Light Years 4 stars
Solo Faces 4 stars
All That Is 3 stars
Burning the Days: Recollection 3 stars
Cassada to-be-read