Rating: 4/5

English: Whatever
German: Ausweitung der Kampfzone
Winner Grand Prix national des lettres &amp; Prix Flore 
It's funny that Houellebecq's debut novel from 1994 was deemed scandalous upon publication, especially considering what he wrote later. In "Extension of the Combat Zone" (idiotic English title: Whatever), we get a remarkable amount of themes that will later be turned into major plot points or whole novels, and the story culminates in an evil spin on Camus' The Stranger that leads straight into madness à la Büchner's Lenz. Our nameless, 30-ish protagonist works for a software firm in Paris, earns well, but has hardly any social contacts - as he is also the narrator, his overall feeling of defeat lingers on every page, and it's also the main provocation here: A fairly rich guy feels defeated by the way the world is structured, and his overwhelming alienation drives him to commit an hideous act. Think American Psycho if Bateman was a middle-class French depressive. 

Until we get there though, we accompany him on business trips implementing software for the French Ministry of Agriculture, meeting various corporate and administrative types (Houellebecq, an agricultural engineer who himself worked for the Ministry of Agriculture, would discuss the clash between nature/farming and automation/efficiency again in 2019's Serotonin). As the protagonist is already deemed unstable, he is teamed up with his colleague Tisserand, a 28-year-old virgin who is desperately seeking to connect with a woman. Meanwhile, the depression and cynicism of the protagonist worsens, leading to a heart condition (go figure) and prompting him to make a fatal suggestion to Tisserand...

The narrative frame is also already very typical for this author (although he would later considerably step up his game): The language remains true to the narrator, ergo: it is plain and cynical, and there are numerous discursive passages pondering the state of the world - Houellebecq would later reach peek debate literature in Plattform and, of course, Submission. The title refers to the world view of the narrator as well: The "combat zone" is the realm of the world adolescents enter and grown-ups live in, a world structured, he argues, by mechanisms of power, money and domination on the one hand and sex on the other. Interestingly, the narrator, who has given up fighting in this battle, is frequently addresssing his readers directly, elaborating on his views regarding a society dominated by the logic of neo-liberal capitalism and social Darwinism (there is even a sub-story about euthanasia - hello, The Map and the Territory). 

I'm endlessly fascinated by Houellebecq's writing, and while this certainly isn't his best effort, "Extension..." and Lanzarote read like books that lay the foundation for other works and are thus interesting for people trying to get to the core of his narratolgy.