Rating: 5/5

84th book of 2020.

S.O.S. I NEED YOUR HELP. I AM INJURED, NEAR DEATH, AND TOO WEAK TO HIKE OUT OF HERE. I AM ALL ALONE, THIS IS NO JOKE. IN THE NAME OF GOD, PLEASE REMAIN TO SAVE ME. I AM OUT COLLECTING BERRIES CLOSE BY AND SHALL RETURN THIS EVENING. THANK YOU, CHRIS MCCANDLESS. AUGUST?

 

I’m unsure how to start this review; for the first time in a while, I’m finding it difficult to access my thoughts on this. I’ve got so much to say, but even after waiting a whole day, my thoughts are all scrambled in the wind. I’ll start with this. At 2am the other night I tapped the touch-lamp on my bedside table and opened my copy of Into the Wild – in pencil, I scrawled, “Literature Failed the Heroes in this Book.” It is pictured below. I then turned out my light, rolled over, and went to sleep.

 

I was born in 1997 – five years after Chris McCandless died. The note I used to start the review was found on the bus his body was in. He weighed about four stone. Jon Krakauer wrote an article about the 24 year old boy who died in Alaska, but his obsession held him longer, long enough to write this beautiful, horrible book. I am glad that he did. This book transcends being about McCandless.

One does not look have to look far to find people laughing at McCandless, calling him an idiot, or worst of all – “He deserved to die.” Ironically, comments like these, which have been wrenching my heart, came out my own brother’s mouth. Though my brother is one to speak rashly, and flippantly about things, he said to me over the dinner table, after I explained the book rather briefly, that it sounded like McCandless was an “idiot”. We are very unalike. My brother sees the world in black and white. He believes something or he doesn’t, there are no grey areas in his life. It was at the dinner table this happened, and when I opened my mouth, clearly some sort of fury or defiance in my eyes, my mother gave me the don’t eyes, the drop-it eyes. Chances are my brother said it only to get a rise out of me, though I think he partly believed what he was saying. McCandless, as far as he was aware, as far as many people are aware, went into Alaska with almost no equipment, no food, and little idea on what he was going to do. He survived 114 days.

Literature is Dangerous

I’ve been unpacking my little late-night scrawl. I awoke in the morning thinking, “Why the hell did I write that? What does that even mean?” I put it down to trying to be clever, 2am delusions. But, I’ve thought about it, and I now stand by my past, tired self. I do not mean that literature is to blame for McCandless’ death, or any of the other people in the book that Krakauer tells us about. What I mean to say, I think, is that they were failed by literature. Literature is dangerous. Book burnings show how intimidating books can be. Rushdie’s six-million pound bounty for writing The Satanic Verses is a modern day testament to the power of books, and the consequences of writing. It’s interesting to think that just about anyone, the most malleable of teenagers, can read books by mad philosophers, to take fiction literally. McCandless loved Jack London, Tolstoy, Thoreau. Krakauer takes us on a jaunt in his own life, when, a year younger than McCandless was in Alaska, he nearly lost his life climbing the Devils Thumb. He admitted to be on a high from reading too much Nietzsche and Kerouac – as if these were factors of his journey. They were. They were for McCandless too. Each chapter of this book starts with a quote, many of which are highlighted quotes from the paperbacks found with McCandless’ body, and many of them mirror the existence the young man was striving for. So, in way, literature inspired McCandless, Krakauer too, into searching for more meaning in life, for something bigger than themselves. To quote Kerouac, “Because in the end, you won’t remember the time you spent working in the office or mowing your lawn. Climb that goddamn mountain.” If that doesn’t make your heart swell with possibility, with ideas of escape, or living in fresh air and leaving behind this mundane 21st century life, then I don’t know what will. And if doesn’t, maybe that’s proof that terrifyingly, if I were less safe and secure in my home, if I lived in America, I could have been a McCandless, or a Krakauer, depending how lucky I was.

I’ve read a lot of Kerouac. I’m getting interested in spirituality, Buddhism, the soul, the nature world. Things that seem to steer me towards the life that the men in this book began striving for. Krakauer is impartial, though you can sense some to some degree a biased opinion, he is mostly removed from the book, leaving it entirely up to the reader to decide for themselves. He includes some of the comments he had, the negative, attacking ones. There are also arguments on my side of the fence: It is hardly unusual for a young man to be drawn to a pursuit considered reckless by his elders; engaging in risky behaviour is a rite of passage in our culture no less than in most others. Danger has always held a certain allure. That, in large part, is why so many teenagers drive too fast and drink too much and take too many drugs, why it has always been so easy for nations to recruit young men to go to war: It can be argued that youthful derring-do is in fact evolutionary adaptive, a behaviour merely encoded in our genes. McCandless knew the risks, and Krakauer allows that he was arrogant too, he was unprepared, yes. His failings do not, cannot, outlive what McCandless was trying to do. A 24 year old man does not die to be remembered for his failings. At least, his words will be remembered.

It is the experiences, the memories, the great triumphant joy of living to the fullest extent in which real meaning is found. God it’s great to be alive! Thank you. Thank you.

Heroes in this Book

This book moved me so much is because of the parallels I have found, possibly projected, in McCandless. I am currently 23, just a year younger than he was. I have a love of literature, some say “obsessive” love, for literature. I am into the outdoors, I have been to many countries, I was in the scouts for most of my childhood, I adore camping and walking… I love the things that McCandless loves. And above all, I can imagine, as I have suggested, if I was less invested in my life here, I can picture myself doing something similar. Maybe not Alaska, and maybe not without supplies, or a map, but certainly walking out with grand (maybe naïve) ideas of transcendence found in the wilderness. Krakauer makes an important distinction: McCandless didn’t want to die, that much is clear from the S.O.S note. In the end, he must have known he was dying, which does pain me a little to admit that he was in that bus, dying, and he knew it. I won’t reveal all the heart-breaking notebook entries, but there are some which show that despite his situation, McCandless was happy. He had escaped civilisation; he was living a truer life than his hero, Jack London, even more than Tolstoy. They were hypocrites where McCandless wasn’t. He lived the life he wanted to live, he lived the life he chose to live. I couldn’t count the amount of people I know that I believe live lives of unfulfilled yearning. It is the most common thing in today’s society – with social media we constantly see lives that we think would be better, lives that we imagine for ourselves. Oh, to be more attractive. Oh, to be more famous. Oh, to be richer. We strive for lives that we can’t achieve, or else lives that we can’t be bothered to try and achieve. McCandless died with complete fulfilment in the life he wanted. He carved through the bullshit of life and reached the epicentre of his yearnings. His yearning was the death of him. But I dare say that he died having fulfilled himself, more than most of the people I know in my own life. Possibly, more than I will ever be able to fulfil my own life. 

That is why I call the people in this book “Heroes.” The photo in this review is one of McCandless' final acts - one hand holding his final note toward the camera lens, the other raised in a brave, beatific farewell. Krakauer goes on to say this, of the photograph: But if he pitied himself in those last difficult hours- because he was so young, because he was alone, because his body had betrayed him and his will had let him down- it's not apparent from the photograph. He is smiling in the picture, and there is no mistaking the look in his eyes: Chris McCandless was at peace, serene as a monk gone to God. Or as McCandless once wrote of himself in the third person, But his spirit is soaring.