Rating: 5/5

I’m the kind of person who loves looking at people’s family albums. Not the 400 of your grandchildren--sorry. It’s not that they aren’t cute. It’s just there’s something about the past. There’s so much room there. Show me your great aunt Elsie who was married to that guy--no one remembers his name, but there he is in the corner of the picture, looking a bit sheepish and wearing his farming overalls. I wonder what his story is?

Carol Shields has woven together a tale full of these ordinary yet captivating family members. By the end, I felt like I knew every one of her characters.

It all begins with a mother (of course), and we are mesmerized by the account of this particular mother: Mercy Stone Goodwill. Every character introduced has a story though, and Shields gives us just enough detail about their lives--the odd bits especially--to keep us fascinated, to bring the family photographs to life.

We follow Mercy’s daughter Daisy through her entire, frustrating life. But in the same way a photograph taken on an overcast day shows the brightness of colors, Daisy’s somewhat dreary existence shows us vivid insights. 

I loved these especially: 

“…the houses of the newly married, she senses, are under a kind of enchantment, the air more tender than in other households, the voices softer, the makeshift curtains and cheap rugs brave and bright in their accommodation.”

“Your mama’s inside you. You can feel her moving and breathing and sometimes you can hear her talking to you, saying the same things over and over, like watch out now, be careful, be good, now don’t get yourself hurt.”

“How can so much time hold so little, how can it be taken from us? Months, weeks, days, hours misplaced--and the most precious time of life, too, when our bodies are at their greatest strength, and open, as they never will be again, to the onslaught of sensation.”

“It surprises Grandma Flett that there is so much humor hidden in the earth’s crevasses; it’s everywhere, like a thousand species of moss.”

This is a wonderful saga. Shields has given us a novel about life: the way we think about ourselves, the way others think of us, and how we might feel about all of that. It explores what is fleeting, and what remains. And what I found so fascinating was how unreliable it all is. What is the real story? What is our real story? Will anyone ever know?