Rating: 4/5

I have varied thoughts about “September”......my first book by Rosamunde Pilcher.
There is nothing particularly extraordinary about the plot: A big party - dance - is going to take place in September for Katy on her 21st birthday. 
Most of the action - or lack of action - takes place in Croy, Scotland....with visits to London. 

For me - what kept me reading - with invested interest - was that I was reading this book with a group of wonderful women. We’ve been discussing this novel in a group thread daily ( the month of Feb). We’re having a blast of fun with this book - but it’s because we’re making it happen!!! Otherwise — without the ladies with me — I might have given up. 

Since our group is discussing the specifics- more gritty details there, I’ll share a few random thoughts and feelings here. 

Rosamund Pilcher has a huge fan of readers. Women love her books. Personally - I’m not jumping to read another book by her next week - I appreciate the type of writer she is. I ‘did’ enjoy this novel - but not without a little kicking and screaming from my inner voice.

My inner voice speaking: [WHEN NOT READING THIS BOOK]…”Oh, must I really get back to it?” .......”It’s slow ....and I forget the names of all the characters”. 

My OTHER VOICE SAYS: [ WHEN READING IT]..... “Yippy me....I ‘don’t’ have dementia after all - I have finally gotten the characters straight”. “I’m engaged with the characters - this town - the local drama - and I’m having fun connecting with my reading group - picking apart the ‘happenings’ with the other ladies. This book is actually pretty darn good. Gotta get with the slow-burn- and be in the mood for it. 

Several characters in “September” have a name starting with the letter ‘V’. It drove me a little batty for awhile. Three other main characters have names that begin with the letter A. 
A couple of other characters with names beginning with the letter I. 
After reading 18% on my kindle — then putting the book down for a day or two —to read another book, I found myself IN TROUBLE. I frickin had to start over. I was moving in the wrong direction for a long book - with other books to read to boot. 
Are you feeling my pain? Lol 

There are a lot of characters in this little village of Croy to remember....
with not much going on other than THEIR LIVES and us knowing their business....
From their walking, gardening, cooking, eating, sleeping, talking to one another, describing one another, shopping, worrying, arguing a little, describing their homes, furniture, wallpaper, pets, references to the famous grouse, the weather, the surroundings, the clothes, people’s bodies and appearance, people’s choices, the children, marriages, general community history - memories- and gossip chatter - and of course INVITATIONS are BEING MAILED OUT.
THE PARTY IS SEPTEMBER 16th....I’ll share no more: God forbid I should give away the juicy details Haha!
ITS ALL DETAILS..... so grab a cuppa tea - a few biscuits- a cozy blanket - a comfy chair — and enjoy a COZY COUNTRYSIDE NOVEL!!!

A little sample writing: note....I could have picked anything.... this is just one of dozens:
 “As Isobel, worn out with the daily demands of her busy life, retreated from time to time to the linen room, so her husband found solace in his workshop.
This was the basement of Croy, an area of stone-flagged passages and dimly lighted cellars. The old boiler lived down here, a brooding, smelly monster that looked large enough to drive a liner, and demanded constant and regular attention and enormous quantities of coke. As well; one or two other rooms were still employed —to store unused china, unwanted items of furniture, the coal and the logs and a much-diminished wine cellar. But mostly, the basement stood deserted, hung with cobwebs and invaded each year by families of field mice”.

Whew!!! 

I can’t NOT rate this book anything less than 4 stars. The author worked too hard, and so did I. Yet......something WAS very satisfying to my SOUL....
I’m guessing for the author too!