Rating: 4/5

A few weeks ago, I found myself smack dab in the center of a literary mystery.

On November 25, 1940, F. Scott Fitzgerald wrote to his friend, Edmund Wilson. In the letter, Fitzgerald accused John Steinbeck of plagiarism.

“[…] it is something else for a man of his years [Steinbeck] and reputation to steal a whole scene as he did in “Mice and Men.” I’m sending you a marked copy of Norris’ “McTeague” to show you what I mean.”

Those are fighting words, Fitzgerald! Very serious allegations.

In 1989, a scholar, Richard Allan Davison located Fitzgerald’s marked copy of McTeague (the one referenced in the November 25, 1940 letter). Davison stated that the book was at a rare book collection at the University of Oklahoma.

Two great literary greats going at it? Get your popcorn ready because there is no way I’m staying out of it!

After ordering a copy of Of Mice and Men, I needed to verify the edition of Fitzgerald’s copy of McTeague to align the page numbers with the commentary.

I reach out to the library at the University of Oklahoma. They don’t have the book.

Fitzgerald’s book is now missing.

What to do?

Where would this book likely go? My first thought: Princeton. In 1950, F. Scott’s daughter, Scottie, donated his personal writings and literary effects to Princeton. In fact, Princeton is in possession of the November 25, 1940 letter.

Princeton does not have Fitzgerald’s McTeague, but, but this time, I have intrigued the Princeton librarian who said, “I did a bit of digging because I love a mystery.”

Apparently, the 1989 scholar, may he rest in peace, was wrong about the librarian helping him. The librarian did not work for The University of Oklahoma but the University of Tulsa.

Now, we are cooking with fire!

I contact the University of Tulsa. They have the book!

With the help of 3 librarians, we were able to find one lost book out of all of the books of the world!

So Possession was exactly the book for this literary nerd!

Possession begins with Roland Mitchell in The London Library. He is a long-time scholar of Randolph Henry Ash.

While Roland is reading Ash’s copy of a book, a mysterious note falls out, sending Roland on a literary journey.

He teams up with Maud Bailey, a Christabel LaMotte scholar, while the more established scholars are hot on their trail.

While Possession is charming and Mortimer Cropper, the villainous American refreshing, the book is victim to 90’s writing.

This was another time.

Consider this quote from Philip Pullman, author of His Dark Materials:

“It was 1993 when I thought of Lyra and began writing His Dark Materials. John Major was prime minister, the UK was still in the EU, there was no Facebook or Twitter or Google, and although I had a computer and could word-process on it, I didn’t have email. No one I knew had email, so I wouldn’t have been able to use it anyway. If I wanted to look something up I went to the library; if I wanted to buy a book I went to a bookshop. There were only four terrestrial TV channels, and if you forgot to record a programme you’d wanted to watch, tough luck. Smart phones and iPads and text messaging had never been heard of. The announcers on Radio 3 had not yet started trying to be our warm and chatty friends. The BBC and the National Health Service were as much part of our identity, of our idea of ourselves as a nation, as Stonehenge.”

Nowadays, authors need to clip from one exquisite sound bite to the next as they are directly competing with TikTok and Netflix.

And Possession was far too long winded, and most of the mediocre poetry should have been heavily edited down.

Sadly, no one has been “hot on my trail” during my scholastic investigations, but tomorrow is another day……

The Green Light at the End of the Dock (How much I spent):
Hardcover Text – $13.77 on eBay
Audiobook – Free through Libby

Connect With Me!
Blog Twitter BookTube Facebook Insta