Rating: 4/5

This was a title mentioned in HBO's The Newsroom of all places, a show from a writer with whom I'm infatuated enough that I, obviously, took the inadvertent hint and picked up a copy. And I'm glad I did. Purdy's argument provides further grounding for a still-developing conception of the socio-cultural effects of what I have come to call the aestheticization of irony. In his intro. and first chapter, Purdy does an exceptional job outlining how ironic discourse has been diffused in our everyday communications and, by extension, our habitual patterns of thought. This treatment is of greatest interest and use to me, but this book is mostly about how such hostility to hope and a learned expectation that public officials don't mean what they say have prevented politics from performing its ostensibly positive social role. This then twists in on itself and constructs the negative feedback loop that encourages the ironic treatment of public life which Purdy would have his readers restore their trust in and seek to improve for the good of the commons. Like Costa's The Watchmen's Rattle, I found my interest waning once Purdy left his aesthetic theorization for a focus on the material consequences of irony, though by reading the one right the other I found myself growing more open to considering the importance of the New Sincerity's parallel material fronts (though the N.S. remains based in aesthetics for me). To a certain degree, like reading "The Suffering Channel," I can't help but feel a sense of tragedy (it's dramatic irony, really) when reading this knowing that the War-on-Terror political era is soon to come (following 9/11) and what that event's (and that event's provoked responses') effect on political speech and amplification of irony's exchange with politics will be. It's as though this was written at the last possible moment for the kind of hope he attaches to America's political future. I wonder, again like I did with Costa, why Purdy doesn't cite "Politics and the English Language" or "E Unibus Plurum," or discuss mass entertainment at any significant length, or contend with art's role in either encouraging or subverting irony's continued social currency (he starts with Seinfeld, but that's about the extent of it). These criticisms, though, don't, for the most part, meet the book on its terms, which, I submit, isn't fair. Purdy, ultimately, offers several new iterations of irony's separation of declaration and meaning in the political sphere of millennial America which is interesting and useful and totally crucial to returning anything close to purpose to politics today.