Rating: 3/5

It's a decent book. The political drama, secret organization, special agents, assassins, big clash of political powers, and a charming lady stuck amidst all this. It had all the tools for best-selling thriller. Yet, somehow, I was only so pleased with it.
Maybe, it is because I've read so many of such stories, or because back in the day, this was one of the first few books to try this style of storytelling, but I managed to predict almost every big twist and reveal, other than Mike belonging to the CIA. The sheer number of times some of these tropes have been carried out in such thriller type books made most of it obvious, as well as the amount of character spotlight and length of the book left. However, even when I've managed to figure out the secret twists, there are instances where execution of the final events manages to make me smile thoroughly. This book managed to thrill me modestly with the execution of the final events. The Ambassador's Folly caught me by surprise to a certain degree. It was something that would have stood out, but it was very well masked by the dozens of things that were happening in parallel. 
The first two 'books' were a bit slow. Even book three was going slow for some time, until the reappearance of Angel. 
I really think that the events within this book could have been expanded upon more. Intense moments were resolved quite quickly, and the overarching threat just didn't feel strong enough. However, I don't want to pick on this book for no reason at all. It is a decent book with a good story. The whole political drama which laid the foundation of this book was well developed. Key events were given decent emphasis, and the ending was really great, when the events finally picked up pace. I think that the character writing was somewhat lacking. There wasn't any character I felt I should be rooting for in the entire book, other than Mike Slade at a few moments. I enjoyed the story as something I read offhandedly. I just felt it had potential to be much more dramatic and magnificent.
I had hoped there would be some continuity to it, having given us an epilogue scene that could arch into another story. However, given that it doesn't exist, I feel I'm free enough to imagine it for myself.

In the end, it's a story I can recommend to someone for the merits it does have. The things that I didn't enjoy were for reasons specific to me, and aren't really a big fault of the story on its own. It's definitely a book that fans of political dramas would chew up happily.