Rating: 1/5

Graphic sex! Racism! Misogyny! Sex tourism! Are you offended yet?

I don't think I can say anything about the misogyny that hasn't already been said. Yes, it's misogynistic. Boringly, predictably so. We get it; women are stupid, worthless whores. Is it wrong of me to wish for a little more innovation in my morning dose of bigotry?

But look at Valérie, some say. Valérie is perfect (which is a problem in itself). She has it all: youth, outstanding looks, superior skills in bed, a lot of money, a very successful self-made career... which she's more than happy to abandon in order to live in a third-world sex tourism resort sucking some middle-aged, boring loser's cock and sexually exploiting the locals with him for all eternity. (But wait! She dies in an Islamic terrorist attack! Isn't it nice how the misogyny and Islamophobia threads are both resolved in one fell swoop?).

And on the topic of cocksucking, apparently it's A-OK as long as the cock in question is Michel's, otherwise it's proof that you're a little worthless slut. Michel knows nothing about Babette and Léa other than they are young and beautiful (like Valérie), they wear revealing clothes (like Valérie) and they went on the same packaged trip as him (like Valérie). But Valérie is sleeping with Michel, while Babette and Léa are not (they might even be -gasp- sleeping with other people!). That makes Valérie a perfect angel of pleasure descended from the heavens, and Léa and Babette a pair of little cocksucking whores. Apparently it's Michel's cock that does the trick.

I agree with Julian Barnes' review in that the sex in Platform is fundamentally pornographic. The women are all exceptionally attractive and skilled, and everyone is always in top form. It's glossy, performative and joyless. And of course the maid joins in.

With all the controversy about the novel's content, before I read it I felt that not enough attention was being paid to the form. Now I know that it's because the writing itself is completely unremarkable (though it does have serious problems, like the poorly thought out and poorly executed point of view shifts). It's as if little thought was given to the actual craft of writing, in the rush of putting forward the "controversial" content (I can imagine Houellebecq's thread of thought as being something like: Pussy. Pussy. Pussy. Have I said "pussy" enough times? Am I outrageous yet? Pussypussypussy. Cock.)

If I had to give a short assessment of Platform, its misogyny and Islamophobia are ultimately so unsubtle and cartoonish that they would hardly merit a mention. The book is so patently meant to offend that I can't bring myself to play into it and be offended. But I do find it criminally self-indulgent and poorly crafted, and that is what makes it not worth your time.