the discrete joys of cultural pessimism 

This volume consists of two of Freud's essays Civilisation &amp; its discontents (1930) and the far shorter 'Civilised' sexual morality &amp; modern nervous illness (1908).

The latter essay is the simple one , it points out that conventional (in turn of the century Vienna) sexual morality is a cause of mental ill health and even when it isn't, the focus on marriage as the only socially acceptable forum for the expression of sexual love in practise causes frigidity in women while among men it produces the effect that (citing Karl Kraus)'coition is only an inadequate surrogate for onanism' (p.147) and therefore disappointment and dissatisfaction in marriage which is meant to be the central social unit and unique source of interpersonal pleasures.

In a wider sense we can see that mental illness can have a social component, and that in such cases it is society which is making us sick, if running off to some other society might offer a cure, Freud does not go so far as to suggest, although some have tried that with variable success. 

I think from this I had a sense of how scandalous Freud was in his day, equally how far his vision of Viennese society - repressed, sexual double standards, the scandal of people in pursuit of their own desires: Colonel Redl, Egon Schiele, Alma Mahler - is now our dominant vision that that society, how far that is fair, just, and reasonable I don't know. The introduction points to the USA where apparently abstinence only education on questions of sexuality and sexual activity is apparently increasingly prevalent, something in the writer's opinion which will guarantee the continuing relevance of Freud as future generations will endure the same miseries as his contemporaries.

Anyhow that was the younger Freud in 1908, making an effort to get his voice heard.

Civilisation &amp; its discontents is a very different piece, it is unhurried and self assured, there is no sense of urgency to save the world from muddled thinking, this is the voice of the man confident that he has a following and that there is some respect and acceptance of his vision, it is above all deeply pessimistic about society and culture, but in a surprise twist not about human history.

Freud is a gregarious author - which I had forgotten, but here as in Die Traumdeutung there is a reference to a friend and their experience in this case of how the friend's yoga practise gave them the Oceanic feeling which Freud imagines is the emotional experience that becomes rationalised into human religion. But I sense in this not Freud the cultural critic out on a limb (or two) on his own, but the friendly Freud, the man in the convivial circle of his fellows.

Reading this essay for the first time it struck me as significant that Freud and Marx were Jews, it is from the later Temple period of Judaism that a conception of history as purposive emerges, which historically is pretty unusual, it is the idea that history has meaning - specifically one created by God. History has a beginning and an end, and in the end God has decreed that there will be Peace, Justice and Good times, Freud and Marx both create secular versions of this, for Marx these ends will be achieved through social and economic developments for Freud through the interactions of basic human drives, he asserts that of the two primary forces- one destructive and anti-social, the other social bonding through love, that love will win through and humans will form a world community in which everybody is tied together in mutual re-enforcing bonds of friendship. Freud doesn't seem to quite believe himself, as he also sees the potential for humanity to self-destruct in an orgy of mutual slaughter. In an aside Freud looks at Communism, a flawed project in his view because for him tensions in human society don't come from an unequal division of property but from the psychological state of man. There is a destructive drive that is in contention with a constructive drive  very much the view of Doestovesky's underground man desiring to throw a stone at the crystal palace.

Freud's vision of man in society reminded me of the opening scene of the film Cool hand Luke  - drunken Paul Newman chopping off the heads of parking meters  and indeed I don't see so many parking meters around these days, that is Freudian freedom, freedom is quite negative in its manifestations in Freud's view, it is the freedom to please yourself by harming others. Civilisation is repression and so in Freud's view a rather good thing. Sickness is the price we pay for social living. For Freud - as we say about ageing - this may not be good, but it is preferable to the alternative. This means as a consequence we are all somewhat repressed and frustrated, and it follows that this is why people were in Freudian talking therapies for ever - there can be no cure , only adaptation, and the marker of a mature well adjusted person is a certain melancholy, if not a persistent low level depression. Freud is distinctly not impressed by his own essay, and we are not surprised by his persistent cigar smoking. Given his views, the need for comfort and reassurance was sufficient for him to smoke himself to death.

Again because this is a late essay, and perhaps one reason why Freud sees it as unoriginal is that it feels like a medley of his greatest hits - Man creates God in his own image, specifically of an angry Father, the brothers overthrow the father, but internalise him as conscience. This Freud describes as
history, it is interesting (for me at least) to see that if he starts by destroying the myths of the society in lived in that he quickly comes to create a new set of myths or 'Just So Stories' to explain why we are the crazy mixed up creatures that we are.

Still the unavoidable awfulness for which we are all responsible, the lingering painful consequences of economic growth and development, our Kafkaesque guilt - it works for me, or doesn't maybe. I had the sense that if Freud had not existed, it would have been necessary to have invented him as a cultural and social critic, poking beneath the surface of our accepted realities, an example here. It is a version of Enlightenment thinking that has limited faith in the goodness of human nature in a Darwinist world - everything is subject to the powers of reasoned analysis and observation, but what people say and believe about themself must not be taken at face value - just look at the self-destructiveness we see in figures in public and private life. Finally Freud looks forward to the possibility that we will be able to analyse entire ages and historical societies "one day somebody will venture upon such a pathological study of cultural communities" (p.117)

In passing Freud seems to use man to mean man rather than people, so this is openly and confidently a one sided perspective. Also there are some great footnotes  on Heine's wish to see his enemies hang on trees before his windows and on the sense of smell in sexual life.

This is a new translation, the translator has sort to avoid certain familiar technical usages in favour of achieving greater clarity, your mileage may vary.