Rating: 4/5

In the time of the Buddha another holy man in India appears, Siddhartha unremembered who sought wisdom. As the son of a Brahmin he had all the advantages in the long-distant past , including boredom nothing it seemed consequential. Rich but poor of soul his brain in constant turmoil and the need, the compulsion , the quest to find answers to the mysteries of life. A strange sadness fills him with great despair there must be something else, nothing here in his father's luxurious house satisfies, not a home though, would quench the thirst. The endless road to discovery on dismal, glum Earth, knowledge, truth...maybe if possible...Nevertheless Govinda his only friend from childhood will travel his path no matter where it leads ...probably to oblivion. Everywhere the same, misery and death for the people, the bleakness, the unloved wretches by the millions, as few are contented , they have wealth, the many live in filth just barely surviving. However reality quickly becomes apparent, most people aren't seeking Nirvana, just trying to find the next meal ," but they are all falling leaves". The two friends join the Samanas a group of ascetic destitutes, yet happy men looking for salvation, always elusive , around the other side of the hill . Gentle Govinda after both at last hear the Illustrious One Gotama speak to the thousands , chooses to follow him. Crushing the spirit of Siddhartha , still the wanderer continues he can't go back. Adventures over the years make him wealthy, he meets a quiet beautiful courtesan Kamala that has money and a merchant Kamaswami who teaches all the tricks to the trade. Naturally he will again reject prosperity it is not what he wants . But slowly too he views nature's wonders, a pretty river's forever waters not caring if the human race exists. Hermann Hesse's famous novel which influenced countless generations ...can happiness and humans be compatible, will people always try but never reach Nirvana. This book has many questions that can be asked for eternity, but never answered to the satisfaction of everyone, well worth reading.