Rating: 5/5

This is my favorite children's book, and it's chock-full of delightful things: Sweden, a small farming community, seasons and traditions, and the plain old fashioned fun that comes from being privy to the everyday life of a child.

The chief delight is that the story is told through the eyes of an 8yo narrator, who is sometimes wise and sometimes clueless, often in the same sentence, and always convincingly 8 years old. The chapters by and large alternate between incidents that are universal (to Swedish tradition or to life more broadly) and particular (to the life of the six Noisy Village children and their specific schemes and escapades). I think the book charms us by offering a picture of real life as we know it, in all its humorous quotidian glory, while at the same time giving us a glimpse of an enchanting world that we ourselves do not know.

This was a reread for myself and my two boys (we read it in January 2021), and we loved it as much if not more than two years ago. Although all the children in the book are a few years older than mine, I think we found it especially delightful that the narrator is a girl with two older brothers, mirroring our family exactly. Ned, my 5yo, asked me to read it throughout the day, during the weekends, and before bed when I wasn't planning to -- this is a first, as he often requests another chapter but never initiates a readaloud. It seems he, like I, was often thinking about the book and longing to return to the world of Noisy Village, which (his father and I hope) marks an important awakening in his literary life. 

Ned gave me this review of the book, which I transcribe here so that I can keep it forever in my archives and heart: "I like the way Lisa talks about so much stuff: days, and the things they have." My interpretation: he delights in the realism, the description of the everyday, and also the material culture depicted in the book. (Me too, Ned!)

By the end of the book, even Anselm, my 7yo, was asking for another chapter, while 4yo Adelaide was a rapt listener the whole time.

"We have one chapter left," I said; "should we read it?"
"Read it!" said Anselm and Adelaide together.
"Don't read it!" said Ned, "because then it will be over. I want to save it for tomorrow."
"Well," I explained, "I do have the second book coming to the library. It might come tomorrow."
"Okay," Ned conceded, "read it!"