Rating: 4/5

Possession, the 1990 Booker Prize winner, is touted as a love story, but it is so much more. A story about obsession, guilt, passion, love, and the transformative power of the written word. A.S. Byatt masterfully ensnared me in the search by Roland Mitchell and Maud Bailey for the possible relationship between Randolph Henry Ash and Christabel LaMotte, two fictitious Victorian poets.

Roland Mitchell is an Ash scholar and postgraduate research assistant who stumbles across the poet’s affectionate letters to a mysterious woman. With some investigative work, he thinks the unknown
 recipient may be LaMotte. Maud Bailey, a scholar of LaMotte who is as devoted or obsessed with this female poet as Mitchell is with Ash, is the person to share this possibly explosive discovery. Together they follow the clues that lead to the relationship and affair. But other academics in Great Britain and the U.S. want the credit for a discovery that could make them famous and forever change all Victorian poetry studies. There is nothing they will not do to make this happen.

Through letters, poems, and journals Ash and LaMotte come alive. Like the characters themselves, all are composed by A. S. Byatt. It just boggles my mind. The poems are not Hallmark verses. They are finely detailed with many references and a wealth of knowledge. I frequently had to read a poem, step away and think about it, and then, reread it. Often, my less erudite mind was still foggy. Does Byatt try to prove her brilliance? I don’t think so. I believe she is just unable to dumb her writing down.

The movie is very enjoyable but somewhat limited. It was like watching an advertisement for a place you have longed to visit. It makes you know visiting will reveal so much more and the experience will be deeper and include long-held memories.

“Now and then there are readings that make the hairs on the neck, the non-existent pelt, stand on end and tremble, when every word burns and shines hard and clear and infinite and exact, like stones of fire, like points of stars in the dark - readings when the knowledge that we shall know the writing differently or better or satisfactorily, runs ahead of any capacity to say what we know or how. It is a sense that the text has appeared to be wholly new, never before seen, is followed, almost immediately, by the sense that it was always there. For the first, time we become fully cognizant of our knowledge.”