Rating: 4/5

This is book two in my publication order (re-)read of all Hustvedt’s fiction and non-fiction. In the case of this book, this was a first-time read. It is Hustvedt’s second novel.

I find myself slightly at odds with many of the reviews here on GR and in the press where the book seems to have been received somewhat unenthusiastically. I do agree with those reviews that it is not as strong as her debut novel (The Blindfold) but I think I enjoyed it a lot more than many of the reviews I have scanned through since I finished it last night.

The basic story line revolves around the titular Lily Dahl and an episode from her life in Webster, a small town in America. She gets to know her neighbour, Mabel, who teaches her how to act for a play (A Midsummer Night’s Dream). She watches her neighbour, Edward Shapiro, in a hotel room across the street from her own apartment and the story takes a different direction when, one evening, she does something that surprises her but surprises Shapiro even more. And we meet several characters who come regularly to the cafe where Lily works the morning shift. One of them is Martin who becomes a pivotal character in the weirdness that unfolds.

And this definitely is a very weird book.

I don’t really want to say very much about the events that happen. I think it’s far better to read the book and be taken by surprise by people’s actions and words.

I don’t know if this is true, but it feels to me like I have made comparisons to David Lynch movies for several books I have read recently. And this one falls into that category. This is a good thing, by the way, because I’m a big fan of those films. I think I feel that way about this book for several reasons. Firstly there’s the way everything seems so normal at the start but gradually the weirdness develops, quite slowly at first but eventually into a full on bizarre situation. Then there’s the overall atmosphere of the book. It has an unsettling feel to it. And the narrative has a habit of suddenly deviating from the main story to focus for a few words or lines on a minuscule detail (like a buzzing fly or a dirty mark on someone’s clothes or a person tapping a finger). I’ve seen quite a few movies where the camera does this and in both this book and those films it creates a strange, suspenseful mood. It’s very effective, I think.

Anyway, as many reviewers have said, this might not be the best place to start with Hustvedt’s work. But I definitely wouldn’t say to avoid this book. Accompanying Lily on her investigations to try to discover what lies behind the creepy/weird events in her town while she navigates a relationship with a married man and tries to learn her part in a play is actually a lot of fun to read. Perhaps the play she is taking part in is a clue - with the emphasis on the dream like nature of the narrative.