Rating: 5/5

4 ½ stars. Excellent suspense thriller. I didn’t want to stop reading.

It’s a long book. I had a hard time putting it down. Lots of suspense. Many times I was saying come on, come on - eager to find out what was going to happen next. John Corey is a smartalecky, arrogant cop working for the FBI. He has many entertaining one-liners and jokes. I liked his humor, but humor is subjective and some readers may not like it. There were a few surprises along the way. Some parts were a little slow, but the last half was the best. The ending was good and complete enough for me, although the killer Asad was still alive and un-caught. The story continues in the sequel “The Lion.”

Asad was a well done bad guy. He’s a stealthy smart killing machine. I consider “The Day of the Jackal” by Forsyth as great. Lion’s Game reminded me of Jackal, but LG was missing the following. I wanted to see how Asad got his information, how his sources got information, and how Asad and those sources communicated.

Asad interacted with many people. It was hard to believe they did not recognize him. Asad’s picture was all over the TV and newspapers.

One negative - a stupid event: Two guys know Asad is in the area with a sniper rifle. So why are they walking outside alone with no bullet proof vests or other protection?

NARRATOR:
Scott Brick did an excellent job as John Corey because Scott does cocky arrogance well. John Corey’s arrogance was written in an entertaining way so it worked. But I’ve given Scott Brick 1 and 2 stars for his narration of other books where he was too arrogant, and it detracted from the book. Scott narrated females nicely here.

DATA:
Narrative mode: 1st person John Corey, 3rd person other characters and scenes. Unabridged audiobook length: 24 hours and 52 mins. Swearing language: strong including religious swear words, but not often used. Sexual language: none. Number of sex scenes: 6 referred to, no details. Setting: 2000 various U.S. locations with a little back story in 1986 Libya. Book copyright: 2000. Genre: suspense thriller.