Rating: 4/5

I loved The Three Investigators Series as a kid, and loved re-reading almost all of the 30-plus books as an adult. "The Secret Of Terror Castle" is a worthy introduction — full of spooky pre-Manson Family atmosphere in the Hollywood Hills, loaded with genuine mystery and populated by humorous but likable characters. Plus, you know ... Alfred Hitchcock himself. 

The story: Jupiter Jones and friends Pete Crenshaw and Bob Andrews (their ages are never given, but they seem to be about 14 or 15 years old) decide to launch their own investigative agency from their home base in the fictional Southern California beach town of Rocky Beach. Jupiter decides that the best way to get established is to convince film director Alfred Hitchcock to be their advocate. Hitchcock is equally amused and irritated by their persistence to enlist him, but finally he allows them to help him find a suitable nearby location for a haunted-house movie. That leads the boys to the secluded Terror Castle, once home to a silent-film star who disappeared years before. The castle, true to its billing, is full of creepy atmospherics that send the boys running — and then coming back. Eventually they discover that real people are behind the frights — and then they set out to discover who they are, and why they're terrorizing anybody who darkens their doorway. 

The story is fast-paced and formulaic. But in the hands of Arthur, who penned the first 10 volumes in the series, the writing is better, deeper and richer than, say, any tale in the Hardy Boys mysteries. The action breathes a little easier, allowing more room for context and character to emerge fully formed. And the mysteries themselves are satisfying — Arthur gives the reader a chance to figure out the solution along with his young sleuths, but usually tucks away some surprises in store that only the smartest youths could possibly puzzle out. I'm happy to say that I was rarely equal to challenge of these intricate plots.

I love these books. Even though I'm 45 years old, I own most of them, and I'll probably read them all again before long.