I go into every post actual Virginia Andrews "V.C. Andrews" book knowing what to expect. Not great literature. Not a narrative driven by complex, believable characters. Not an even vaguely plausible plot. You won't get that here. 

Reading a Neiderman Andrews book and lamenting its lack of literary qualities is like going to McDonald's and complaining you weren't seated on a lacquered antique chair at a table covered in 800TC French linen set with softly glowing candles, fresh floral arrangements and silver cutlery, the food served on Wedgwood china.

That's not what you came here for, and that's not what you're going to get. Unfinished Symphony gives us exactly what we expect from a Neiderman novel: a fast moving and at times janky plot, clunky dialogue, characters firmly delineated as either good or bad, and an unwavering devotion to telling, not showing. Do we really need to know that the extremely background character being introduced is "a redheaded man in a pair of white pants and a light blue shirt stepped out. He looked no more than thirty, thin and slim-waisted, at least six feet tall with freckles over his forehead and cheeks."? And that's about all we learn about him, as he disappears from the narrative forever 2 pages later. (And the phrase "I couldn't believe the posh splendor, the opulence!" is lifted in its entirety from Flowers in the Attic.)

But here's what ticked me off about the book. The climax of the story cormes when Melody that discovers her cousin, Laura, whose apparent drowning death in a sailing accident prior to events in the m main trilogy drives much of the subsequent action, was actually rescued alive from the ocean; but the shock of seeing her boyfriend drown before her eyes and almost dying herself induced traumatic amnesia in Laura, so she was secretly institutionalised by her Grandmother Olivia, who sought to protect the family from the shame of Laura's condition and the fact she was naked when rescued from the water (Laura and Robert were getting down to it, up to it, and doing it on a secluded beach, when they realised a storm had blown in, and was blowing their boat away. They rushed out to retrieve it, but it didn't go so well.

Learning of this years later, Cary and Melody ascertain the psychiatric facility Laura had been detained in, and race there hoping to bring her home but on arrival are informed Laura had drowned herself after all not long after arrival.

Cary and Melody return home, trying to process everything they've learned, the horrific betrayal of Grandma Olivia, who attended Laura's funeral, witnessing the grief of her son (Laura's father) and his family, whilst knowing all the while the girl was alive.

And how are they going to tell Aunt Sara, who was so utterly crushed by the loss of her beloved daughter she's existed ever since in a strange nether world of despair and a sliver of hope that Laura may just walk in the door?

We don't know.

Melody returns to live with Sara, Cary and May whilst she completes her final year of school. She moves back into what was once Laura's room. But we're never told when, how or even if Sara was ever told what had happened. You'd think that would be kind of a big deal, the whole faked death amnesia legal fraud secret institutionalised thing. I've lead a long and at times colourful life, and I've never even heard of anything vaguely similar happening to anyone I know.

But in Neiderman's V.C. world, Cary and Melody forget about it to focus on such scintillating happening as Melody writing her valedictorian speech and describing her graduation ceremony in tedious detail. Goddamnit, though. If we have room for detailed description of the clothing, styling and freckles of a guy who opens a door and is never seem again, there's room in the story for the aftermath of Laura. How did Sara react? Did she go into shock at what she thought she'd known turning out to be a lie? Take some small comfort that her daughter took control of her own fate in the end? Anywhere in between? I want to know and they won't tell me and I'm mad, I tell you.