Rating: 5/5

Wow. This book is beautiful, funny, sweet, sad, slyly funny, sensitive. There are moments the book seems to be written with a sense of modesty in the face of a complex and difficult-to-understand world--but with sunning narrative grace, and perhaps a bit of a swagger. 

Soumchi is a short novel narrated by a boy living in British occupied Jerusalem after WWII. He is socially awkward--to a degree I think his emotional awkwardness and way of viewing the world are deeply influenced by growing up with so many adults broken by the holocaust. Not only is he socially awkward, but he's in love with a girl, Esther, and he knows it's not acceptable to feel that kind of tenderness, and so he tries to deny his feelings to himself and others, and treats his beloved as one fears an 11 year old boy in this position might. 

Soumchi, like all Jewish fools, is wise beyond his years. Home isn't safe for him, and neither is school. He has an artist's temperament (he's a young poet, or poet in the making) and at home and at school pretty much wherever he goes, he's bullied, neglected, or misunderstood. But his imagination (great imaginary adventures) takes him away from the pain of every-day life.

When his uncle gets him a bicycle, Soumchi thinks his problems are over. He'll travel far away leaving behind all of the hurt. But, as it turns out, his problems have only just begun...

[The rest may be spoilery? I'm not sure, but if you're cautious about these things, probably best to stop here.]

The adventures begin with a visit to his friend Aldo, who is wealthy and very wily when it comes to business deals and desperate to ride a bicycle (his parents won't let him.) Soumchi barter's the bike for a bit of Aldo's train set and on his way home, finds himself on Goel's turf. Goel is as street-smart bully. By the end of the day Soumchi feels he's lost mostly everything, and the story has the feel of the folktales under the official folktale-type heading "trading away one's fortune." But this is not a book about a lost bicycle. It's a book about the strange twistings and turnings of fate, and about the blessing of coming into contact with the possibility of new and different and tenderer kinds of connection. 

At a certain point in the book, Soumchi meets Engineer Inbar, the father of his beloved Esther. Inbar invites Soumchi to his home. The conversation between Soumchi and Engineer Inbar is, well, extraordinary in its simplicity and narratively quite brilliant. The conversation is a turning point. I won't say too much about it. Only that in this conversation, disagreement does not (as it generally seems to in Soumchi's world) turn into violence or name-calling. Below is one of my favorite quotes, Engineer Inbar responding to Soumchi. 

"Only you'll have to try to persuade them to see matters in the same light. The days of the bible, alas, are over and done. Ours are a different matter altogether. Who on earth nowadays can turn walking sticks into crocodiles and beat rocks to make water come out? Look, I brought these sweets back last week, straight from Beirut, by train. Try one. Go on. Enjoy it. Don't be afraid. It's called Rakhat Lokoom. Eat up. Isn't it sweet and tasty?..."

Soumchi has lied to Inbar and it isn't clear to me if Inbar knows it, but I have the feeling he does, and that his, in a way, is the voice of the author coming through. But who knows. All I know is this is a short, exquisite tale of childhood, a fable of sorts, in which Soumchi loses a bicycle, a train and a dog, and finds something much more valuable.