Rating: 4/5

“Lord Edgware Dies” by Agatha Christie features our iconic detective Hercule Poirot tackling a high-society murder that defies an easy explanation, just like your classic Christie book! In here, an actress who is desperate for divorce approaches Poirot after her husband’s sudden agreement on it, only for the lord to turn up dead the next day amid conflicting alibis and witness accounts.

The case draws Poirot into London’s theater world and aristocratic circles, where possible impersonations and hidden motives complicate the investigation. Christie’s precise and absolutely amazing plotting keeps readers guessing through layered clues but also very complex and sharp character studies.

This Poirot novel showcases (once again), Christie’s skill in misdirection without having to rely on gimmicks. Making it a great compact puzzle for fans of classic detective fiction! 

————-
Gosh, it feels so great to read an Agatha Christie book yet again! It’s been around a year or more since I last read one, and I’m not disappointed at all once again. 

The pacing was amazing. The author has always been (at least for me) brilliant at catching the readers attention. And, unlike some thrillers that can start by going quite slow, the book quickly makes sure to merge you into the murder/conflict and quickly keep your mind in focus. Because also, unlike some other books, you have to pay attention to details, to characters, to dialogue. Cause you never know what seems to be insignificant could be something extremely relevant. Hell, I had to go through the same conversation or paragraphs more than once just so I wouldn’t get lost. (Successfully did so.) 

The plot is very good too! What I’ve always appreciated about Agatha’s books, is the way the main conflict isn’t just solving a murder, but solving an entire web of different key elements to indeed, figure out who is behind everything. 

Our protagonist is Poirot along with Hastings. Amazing, comical yet smart duo. And… pretty much smarter than me in every way. And what can I say about the rest of the characters? UMM, WHAT THE FUCK! I was genuinely so lost, conflicted, and my brain kept switching over and over again on who the culprit was. As you could guess, I wasn’t right because… I never had a clue on who it was. 

I think this is a very nice and interesting mystery that could easily catch anyone’s attention and that a lot of people could find unexpected and enjoyable! Christie never misses and I will always bow to her.