Rating: 2/5

Too much of the story is a helpless victim being afraid.

STORY BRIEF:									
In 1967 Susan saw four fraternity brothers beat her boyfriend to death in a college hazing. They were going to kill her, but she escaped and testified against them. Two of them later died in a car accident. It is now 1980. Susan just woke from a three week coma from a car accident. During the next several days she sees the four fraternity brothers in the hospital. Two are working as orderlies and two are patients. The four men get her alone and tell her they are going to rape and kill her. This happens repeatedly. She is afraid all of the time. She tells her doctor about them, but he explains that they could not be the same men because the men in the hospital are about 20 years old, not 33, and they have different names. Logic says she must be going mad, because this couldn’t be happening. No one believes her.

REVIEWER’S OPINION:
I listened to the first 4 hours and was very frustrated. She was such a helpless victim. Over and over again she is afraid and being hurt by these men. I wondered if this whole thing was going to end up being one long dream - because two men had died. Or did the deaths not happen? Or was this a hallucination or drug induced hallucination? Was she hypnotized? Or had she died and was this happening in hell? Or was she really going insane? It was not fun. I was tired of it, so I skipped the next 3 hours and listened to the last 2 ½ hours. When I started listening at the end, the same thing was still going on. She was running from these men, but they kept showing up, hurting her, and frightening her. I was glad I skipped three hours of that. Finally, the last 50 minutes was a different kind of story. That part was more interesting and not just the helpless victim. The truth is learned and there is some action. However, it’s done in a tell-all method with one character explaining everything. Tell-alls are not a good way to end a story. The ending was too easy to be believable, but at least it was happy.

Some experts say don’t write about a wimp. This felt like 9 hours of writing about a wimp. I would have preferred that the first 9 hours of possible madness be shortened to maybe 2 hours. It might have been better as a novella.

The two narrators were good: Laural Merlington and Mel Foster.

DATA:
Narrative mode: 3rd person. Unabridged audiobook reading time: 9 hrs and 56 minutes. Swearing language: strong, including religious swear words, but rarely used. Sexual language: none. There was one sex scene, briefly mentioned with no details. Setting: 1980 locations not mentioned to avoid spoilers. Book copyright: 1982. Genre: mystery suspense. Ending: happy for main character.

OTHER BOOKS:
For a list of my reviews of other Dean Koontz books, see my 5 star review of Lightning
http://www.goodreads.com/review/show/...