Rating: 5/5

The Great Discworld Re-Read Part 3. A self-indulgent series of reflections and reviews.

An intellectual children's novel. Trucker tells a genuinely fun fantasy story in a unique setting but is also a very subversive book in the best possible way. It's a book about the joys of education and personal development. It makes reading a superpower and, through comedy, lets the reader challenge the meaning of words, beliefs, social constructs. It invites the audience to question everything and find the tools to elevate themselves to a better life. It's openly dismissive of gender stereotypes and bullying leaders who force empty rhetoric on others. And it does all this while being just endlessly witty. This is a brilliant book, a sweet book, a book about the important of education and self-reliance, and the responsibility of the educated to help those around them. Wonderful stuff.

My childhood copy, which I retrieved from a basement somewhere, had this great quote from Harlan Ellison as the only words on the back cover -
"Terry Pratchett is more than a magician. He is the kindest, most fascinating teacher you ever had. He tells a story of the nomes, the 'little people' who have always lived in the baseboards of a large department store, and in this story we see ourselves: how high is up, where does the horizon lie, how do we know everything we've always believed to be true? A delicious, rewarding, wry and antic fable with a river of important philosophy surging beneath its surface. Buy this book for a smart kid, and open the sky as wide as the heavens."

That old softie, how absolutely right he is. I must have been eleven when I read this and I remember it being a little challenging but vivid and eye-opening. Whole sections felt wonderfully familiar and the entire climax I recalled as if I read it just a couple years ago. It's a book that inspires a fascination with language and the willingness to challenge dubious information. It's funny that Harlan Ellison, a name I of course didn't recognize, would have this quote on here. I actually gasped when I turned the book around and saw his name, someone who, in my 20s, was another obsession. I loved this book is what I'm saying. It hides some really great messages in a hilarious fable, what else can you ask for? 

I am splitting up the trilogy, partially because The Bromeliad is a little longer and denser than I remember (and for some bizarre reason I recall almost nothing of the sequels), and because I didn't realize this was released so far into the Discworld series, he's already published 6-7 Discworld books (5 books in 1989?!). So Colour of Magic is next, onward and up we go!