Rating: 3/5

This wasn't quite what I was expecting. It's Houellebecq's first novel so maybe that explains the sense of something being off, the lack of his usual humour, his nihilism, his style, and the focus on Western civilisation's decline as a whole. This thing is more constrained, more depressing, and more precise in its exploration of sex as a capitalist commodity (ushering in a future of men who can acquire an abundance and men who, one might even call them incels, cannot). As ever Houellebecq is ahead of the curve and sees what's coming before it arrives but the book felt like it lacked something. 

The story revolves around an unnamed computer programmer coming to terms with his worsening ennui and depression, his banal life, his dull meetings, the book a classic example of the existential novel (which I normally love but without the opinion which I prefer these books to have). This is almost a very mature work, cold, distant, a more thoughtful version of Houellebecq which is surprising as his later works become a lot more cynical and funny. The book's prose is also very matter of fact, occasionally staid and functional, and the world his protagonist inhabits is indeed dull and lifeless. When he encourages his friend Tisserand, an ugly man who cannot get laid, to kill a black man who has left the club with a girl and taken her to the beach, there is, of course, a strong whiff of Meursault and his Arab. And here, in this moment, aside from the general swipes at modernity, we have one of the main themes of the piece. Namely, that the sexual liberation movement did not produce a socialist free-love environment where everyone benefited, but instead was gobbled up by the capitalist decree of status and consumption. In other words, high value men will reap the rewards while ugly men, like Tisserand, will sit in the corner of the club being repeatedly rejected. It's at this point that the Smiths lyrics popped into my head:
There's a club if you'd like to go. You could meet somebody who really loves you. So you go and you stand on your own. And you leave on your own. And you go home. And you cry. And you want to die.
It's an interesting conclusion which Houellebecq is making and one which I think has proven to be correct. He even includes some Muslim terrorism in the book to once again reiterate that he sees what's coming while the rest of us are busy buying CDs and bed linen. It's very effective and very accurate. But again, I just didn't enjoy this as much as his other works for some reason. It was, for me, a little too dry, and a little too on the nose. It works well as an existential piece but it lacks Houellebecq's nihilistic touch, his personality not as fully present here as it is in his later works. As a first novel it's pretty great but compared to what was to come, it's a tad forgettable.