Rating: 4/5

Do you ever wish you could erase that addiction, that obsession, that entire phase in your life where you lost touch with reality? Lost it to something/someone that gave you that adrenaline rush that you thought was real? 

Most of us do, for surely the pain we have gone through filling the void where our addiction once so significantly stood, has been soul-wrenching. We think we’re over it – we sit there smiling at our lives, looking at family and friends with admiration and gratitude, cherishing the gentle touch of their sweet words, and then BAM! It’s back. Like a possessed boomerang with a dying affinity to our soul, it shoots up from around the corner and hits us, hard. But wait a minute, weren’t we over it? 

You know exactly what I’m talking about. Your version may be different, may be more colorful, messier, and still impossible to explain to anyone who hasn’t been through it, but you know. You feel his/her finger grazing your thigh, you smell that which reminds you how that thing/person used to make you feel, you hear that song and it brings you back to a you who was so much more alive and beautiful, not the you in the mirror today. And all around you, all the blessings and logic and love in your life, vanish, vacuumed up into an abyss of never-again’s and what-if’s that you know simply no longer have a place in your life. 

And yet it won’t go away. It won’t.

Would you almost lose it all again for this addiction? Do you remember how insane you got last time? 

Welcome to the world of 
  Iguana Love
, where themes of obsession, passion and the chaos that prevails, plays out.

Described as Noir fiction, 
  Iguana Love
 is set in Miami, Florida. Narrated by a woman named Ramona Romano, a nurse who is deeply dissatisfied with her marriage, she heads out to a bar one night and ends up in bed with a stranger. The sex is hot, scorching with freedom, and soon Ramona is visiting the bar several times a week.
  “I’d caught myself on fire, and I thought I could find someone to put it out. And Yes, more than once I left with a man, fucked him, went home and tried to make it all up, do the impossible.”
Ramona eventually divorces her husband, quits her job as a nurse and starts a scuba-diving course. She redefines her shape by taking up body building and swallows handfuls of steroids to pump up those muscles.

Her sex life is spiced up with an increasingly complicated power struggle between four buffed and polished hunks; three sea-divers and her body trainer. But it is only one of these men, the bad boy of the bunch (Enzo), that is the object of her desire. He is a tease, a manipulative sod, a man who everyone tries to warn her to stay away from. But she doesn't listen. She overlooks everything she sees and hears. She does ANYTHING to hold his attention. 

Passion, and indeed explicit sex scenes, is taken to the limits in this book, so much so that Hendrick's says a criticism of her novels is that 
  “women especially, who haven’t experienced sexual obsession, just don’t believe that it exists. None of my characters so far have chosen happiness, wealth, sanity, or safety, over passion…”
Tangled Web UK further describe 
  Iguana Love
 as:
  "raw, graphic - at moments even a bit shocking - and as deliciously nasty a piece of work as you can find. Hendricks is Jim Thompson in a g-string."

  Iguana Love
 is lurid and gripping and turns nasty as Ramona is pushed to desperate measures – sexual, primal, murderous – to regain some measure of her own identity.

And what of the title? 
Ramona finds an Iguana looking at her through her bedroom window. She goes outside and catches it, and brings it into her home as a pet. 

Now we all know that Iguanas are cold blooded reptiles. They are not easy to care for. And Ramona soon learns this, in more ways than one!

Vicki Hendricks describes the title's meaning as follows:
  “Ramona becomes predatory in response to Enzo's manipulation, which she has allowed to overcome her through her obsessive love for him. Enzo and Ramona are two of a kind, both in need of challenge, both bored by easy pickings, both like the reptile, the iguana, that cannot love and, therefore, presents a challenge. If the cold-blooded reptile or person ever returns love, the challenge is over and the positions reverse. Ramona is the iguana to her soon-to-be ex-husband, and Enzo is the iguana to her. Iguana love makes the world go 'round and 'round.”
In life, we all take chances. We all make choices. And there's always some price to pay. Ramona knew what would eventually come due. 
  “I was paying the price for taking my chances. What was I after? It was hard to remember. Freedom, adventure, control over my life – I’d fallen short of getting those. Something else had sneaked in and taken over my mind.”
Like many of us, she pursued it anyway. Compulsively and irrationally.