Rating: 5/5

I read this as a buddy read with Goodreads friend Hilary, for the first time; it wasn’t her first time. I’m so grateful she told me how much she loved the book when she was a child and finally inspired me to get it off my to read shelf. It was a great book to buddy read. There was so much to discuss and it was so much fun. We were flexible each day with how many chapters we read and at some point we started reading our chapters at the exact same time, 8 time zones apart. That made the reading experience particularly enjoyable for me. 

I loved the book and am so glad that I’ve read it. I want to go on and read the next two books. It would have been a huge loss (even if I had never realized it) if I’d never gotten to this book. It’s an excellent book. 

There are lovely illustrations, one each, on the title page and at the start of every chapter. They give just a hint of what is to come in the story. 

I would like to read a biography about the author. This is historical fiction but closely based on the author’s childhood experiences, and I’d love to know what really happened and what was changed or made up, and also what was left out. It all seem so real that it read like an autobiography. I kept forgetting that it was fictionalized. 

I loved the writing style and storytelling style. It’s a very well written book. 

The child’s voice and point of view are done wonderfully and authentically. 

The descriptions are wonderful and I felt as though I was in the various settings and experiencing what the family members were experiencing. German, Switzerland, France and all that was going on in those places vividly came to life. The food, the customs, everything were vivid and evocative.

The account perfectly captured the feelings of being a refugee, an immigrant, of belonging and of not belonging. Their experiences and the places they were and the relationships were all interesting and had some depth. A lot was packed into a relatively short book. 

Even though I knew they got away I felt so nervous from the suspense. There was quite a bit of suspense at several points in this story. I was so anxious when they went to France (until I read the author bio blurb and saw the year they left for England) and so eager for them to get out of France and to England before the Nazi occupation. Even though I knew Anna and her family would get away and be safe I felt scared for them several times during their story. 

I love the family. They’re flawed characters but good people and I loved them all. I appreciated that in Germany, and in Switzerland and France, and England, that they had people “100% on their side” – decent good people supporting them and not supporting Hitler’s policies. 

There were some people who were bigots, and there were also a few heavy things for a middle grade book, including two things toward the end. One was unexpected for me and left me feeling very sad. I was expecting a bad outcome in this case but didn’t think it would come in this book (maybe in book two, if ever?) or happen in this exact way. 

I was grateful for all the humor in the book, especially that included toward the end and at other times the book dealt with serious subjects, because otherwise it would have been depressing, even though it’s not at all a depressing book. 

The ending felt too abrupt because I wanted more, but that just makes me glad there are 2 more books.

This would have been a favorite book of mine at ages 9-12. And it’s 5 star worthy now.