Can there be spoilers in a book about a Woman who could see the future but was never believed? Can there be spoilers about the matter of Troy? 

I was won over by the early mention of Penthesilea, as it happens the image there of Achilles is the one which stalks through the book, a beast the beast Kassandra calls him throughout, and yet no beast would be so bestial, as with the story illustrated on that vase I couldn't help thinking that there was a double entendre  since despite Wollstoncraft's best efforts I remain unreformed in Achilles' indiscriminate lust for men and women all transfixed on his lance.

I wondered at first, since in the early few pages we are already approaching Mycenae, how Wolf would fill the 160 pages of the book, but the end is not delayed by potholes or even broken axles but by consciousness as Cassandra in a round about way tells the story of the Trojan war from her point of view. As Kalliope points out in her review there is a big problem with Cassandra's voice in that her gift was to be able to see the future but never be believed, can we believe her? Or is it wise to accept at face value her account of the past, which itself was once the future? In the end this is also a story, and all stories are lies and through editing and selection must misrepresent. It was a Cretan who said that all Cretans are liars, shall I believe him?

"Die Leute hier - naiv, wenn ich sie mit den Troern vergleiche; sie haben den Krieg nicht erlebt - zeigen ihre Gefühle" (p14) reminded me that Christa Wolf had a for a time been a Stasi informant back in the day. What one has lived through is not always so easy to communicate to others who have lived through their own different experiences. And in "In Helena, die wir erfanden, verteidigten wir alles, was wir nicht mehr hatten. Was wir aber, je mehr es schwand, für um so wirklicher erklären mussten. So dass aus Worten, Gesten, Zeremonien und Schweigen ein andres Troia, eine Geisterstadt erstand, in der wir häuslich leben und uns wohlfühlen sollten (p102) something about the nature of war and Great Causes.

I suppose what I was missing was more about prophecy and not being believed, if I was to give a star rating then for this book I wouldn't go beyond 4 stars, no, not even by your 4.173 will you tempt me, maybe my burden of expectation was too great, but I wouldn't push this on anyone, but as with Christopher Logue's  War Music early exposure to the matter of Troy establishes lasting pull. For the first time though it struck me how weird it was to tug the wooden horse inside the walls - surely such plunder is always given up as a burnt offering to the gods? I liked that Wolf gave Aeneas to Cassandra as her lover, the man destined to leave broken hearts behind him all the way to Rome. It is hard, I feel, with so well established a theme to separate the author from the reader, am I moved by the words on the page or by my own sense of Mycenae's Lion gate and the Wind swept Plain of Troy, one doesn't escape one's self in the labyrinth so easily  and one really has to be careful not to catch one's horns on the low ceilings. I can't say. At one point  which foolishly I didn't make a note of  Cassandra feels that everyone can see the future, it's just a question of looking and not putting blinkers on yourself, or not so much even looking but more simply not not looking. That is my lasting impression - this is a rereadable text, made rich by the lives of author and reader alike.