Rating: 3/5

Tales from the Wienerwald is an atmospheric, humorous tragi-comic soap opera full of a full Shakespearean cast of characters, from the ridiculous to the sublime, and a real sense of place, time, society and politics. It has added appeal if you are aware of the character of the settings, the differences between the streets of the 8th Viennese district, the idylls of the Wienerwald and the more extreme natural luxuries of the Wachau. Horvath captures Vienna and it's surroundings, the spread of it's society and it's morbid sense of humour.

The story is essential a failed romance between a young lady, Marianne, and a wastrel, gambling young man, Alfred, with family in the Viennese suburbs. The girl's father is a puppet shopkeeper, slightly mad and lecherous, and is surrounded by a cast of misfits, wannabe nobles spouting French and English at embarrassing will, a flirtatious, independent shop girl, the snubbed butcher and his uncouth assistant and a visiting fop, a relative from a place no one can remember the name of. From Alfred's family we only meet his submissive mother who waits for his visits, and his malicious, angry grandmother after the repayment of Alfred's debts. The couple have a child, separate, and the child is sent to grow up with those two women in the Wachau.

The dialogue is bawdy, full of innuendo and plays on words. Despite hardships and disappointments suffered by the characters, the tone is lighthearted and satirical for the majority of the play, culminating in a traditional mass gathering and reconciliation of characters at the end who then travel together to the Wachau to visit the puppetmaster's new grandchild. There Horvath switches the tone, built up slowly by the short encounters with the almost fairy tale evil grandmother, and ends with a tragedy of murderous, morbid proportions, leaving the gathering floundering and the story's ending in tatters. It is an untidy, unpleasant and realistic ending that reflects the faults and unpleasantness of the characters.

Mixing various forms of comedy (farce, slapstick, sexual comedy, black humour) with a sarcastic, grim look at Viennese society, Tales from the Wienerwald provides a great historical window to the city and it's stories, to the connections between land and urban scenes that so defines Vienna, and encapsulates the morbidly obsessed sense of reality and humour that is mirrored in much of Austria's literature, film and television of the modern era. 6