Rating: 2/5

★★☆☆☆½

“We have a responsibility to stand watch over one another, we are watchers, all of us, watchers, guarding against the darkness.”

Travis Cornell truly believes he’s cursed. Seemingly, everyone he’s ever loved has suffered an untimely death, including his entire army unit and more recently his wife. He’s all alone in the world, scared to make any new connections, slowly slipping into a dark depression. In an attempt to lift his spirits, he revisits a favorite childhood destination—the Santa Ana foothills. He needs some time to decompress, commune with nature, maybe shoot a few snakes or shoot himself, who knows? As he’s hiking down a trail, a Golden Retriever appears in his path refusing to let him pass.
 
All her life Nora Devon has been under the thumb of her overbearing aunt. Homeschooled and locked away from the world; constantly reminded of the dangers of men. Taught to live vicariously through her books and artwork; never daring to venture out into the real world. So browbeaten that even after her aunt’s passing she still suffers from crippling agoraphobia. When Nora finally does go outside, she quickly realizes that everything her aunt warned her about is true. She’s immediately stalked and harassed by a lowlife bent on having his way with her. Trapped and reeling, with no apparent means of escape, a Golden Retriever arrives just in the nick time to thwart those advances.

Vince Nasco is a deranged hitman who believes his special superpower allows him to absorb the very life force of his victims. He’s confident that once he’s killed enough people he’ll achieve immortality. One day soon a Golden Retriever may put that belief to the ultimate test. Ssssnap. 

Meanwhile, there’s some strange goings-on at Banodyne Laboratories, including a couple of accidental deaths and a lab explosion. Along with a string of grisly murders in the surrounding foothills, and a frantic NSA manhunt. What the hell’s going on, and who or what is “The Outsider?”

This story required suspending my disbelief, which isn’t a problem in and of itself, but, when combined with mediocre writing and some truly cringe-worthy dialog—like a black NSA agent yukking it up with his redneck sheriff buddy—that’s a tall order. The sections with Travis and Nora eventually became insufferable as well, because he continually had to reassure her and stroke her fragile ego. There were also a few too many dated references, and, of course, all the shenanigans with the phone tracing added a lot more excitement to the tale then would have been possible with a more modern story. There was also a major plot hole in the ending.  After the government had put so much time, money, and resources into tracking down the dog, there’s no way in hell they would simply give up when their suspect claims, “You’re too late assholes the dog’s dead.” 

Overlooking all its shortcomings, the story was fun, in a sappy kind of way. I totally get how this could be a comfort read for those who grew up with Koontz—the love just oozes off the page. So much so, I was this close to rounding up my rating until I made one crucial mistake—I picked up that next Jay Porter book, before writing this review, and was reminded of what good writing actually looks like. Sorry guys, but Koontz is a hack, and, to be perfectly honest, I’m more of a German Shepherd kind of guy. 

2.5 stars - If this is the best Koontz can do, I think I’ve seen enough. Adios Deano: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4RaG7...

“The human species is a parade of fools, after all, and I am often at the front of the parade, twirling a baton.” —Dean Koontz in the afterword

Buddy read with Eazy-E, The Lost Connection, Annie Wilkes, Boss Hogg, and the Monkey Queen.