Rating: 4/5

This book is an account of one of the most decisive battles of World War II. It marks the spot in history when the Russian Army stopped retreating from the relentless German invasion which was started in June 1941, and when the utter, catastrophic defeat of the Germans gave the Russians and their allies in the United States and Great Britain a huge morale boost. This was one of those turning points where the ultimate outcome of a great conflict could trace its origins. 

The invasion of the Soviet Union by Germany in 1941 (Operation Barbarossa) was initially a huge success. The Germans used their tried and tested "Blitzkrieg" tactics involving fast-moving tank columns, supported by air support, and followed by mechanized infantry, to gobble up vast tracts of Russia. After the winter of 1941-42, the upcoming German strategy included an attack on the Russian Caucasus oil fields by Army Group South. This would deprive the Russians of their access to oil and place the supply in German hands. The German dictator, Hitler, added an additional objective to the attack plan and split the Army Group by diverting the German 6th Army to capture the city of Stalingrad. Benefits of this action would include the elimination of a Soviet manufacturing center, and receipt of positive propaganda that would ensue from capturing a city renamed after the Soviet tyrant and dictator.

The German army, led by General Friedrich von Paulus, expected an easy victory. The city was reduced to rubble first, by the German air force. Tens of thousands of Russian civilians were killed in the opening days of the campaign, which started in the warm weather of July. The German forces found themselves engaged in a door-to-door battle in a pile of rubble defended by Soviet soldiers who were committed to defend the city or die in the attempt. All of the German advantages of fast movement, heavy guns and air superiority were cancelled; they found themselves fighting for a fixed patch of land, and could not use artillery or aerial bombs to support their forces because their enemies were engaged with them, literally face-to-face. An army which was used to overrunning a hundred kilometers of enemy ground a day was reduced to sending its soldiers to die or be wounded trying to capture single buildings. Casualties on both sides piled up as battles were waged to capture, lose, and regain single buildings, sometimes multiple times. 

If you think this review is turning into your least un-favorite high school history class, don't despair. This battle, like all great conflicts, has tons of books devoted to it. A student of history could spend unlimited time just studying the data surrounding such actions, and that is all good and well if you want to research this subject deeply . William Craig, however, has written this book for the general reader; he has presented a story of the struggle of millions of people, soldiers and civilians alike, who found themselves involved in this human tragedy of huge proportions. He, of course, gives the background of the battle in order to understand its context, but he is not writing a statistical treatise or army "order of battle" of the conflict. He makes extensive use of first-person accounts, including available historical records, and interviews which he has conducted with survivors. As such, this is a work which, in a non-partisan way, tells how civilians caught in a hotly contested war zone suffered from brutal abuse and starvation; how attacking soldiers found themselves living for months in deadly proximity to their enemies, facing exposure to ever-increasing freezing weather with inadequate winter clothing and diminishing rations while slowly realizing that there will be no retreat or rescue from certain death or capture; how defending soldiers had to absorb unending casualties fighting in a city bordered by a river which they would not be permitted to re-cross until their desperate, deadly enemy was subdued. 

The key to the outcome of the battle was the location the river Volga, which ran against the eastern edge of the city. The Germans, despite taking heavy losses, were able to push the Soviets back against the river to the extent that they eventually controlled about ninety percent of the city. Even then, the Soviet commander, Marshal Georgi Zhukov, kept reinforcing his army in the city by sending them across the river first, in boats, then by foot across the ice. The advance into the heart of the city by the Germans actually became their trap, because Zhukov was readying a counter-offensive in the Germans' rear. In the best German-inspired "blitzkrieg" fashion, the attacking Russian forces on the Germans' flanks converged on a spot defended by the Germans' inferior allied forces from Italy and Romania (Germany augmented its forces in Barbarossa with Italian, Romanian and Hungarian army divisions). This Russian pincer movement closed, and trapped over a quarter of a million German soldiers, and many more of their puppet allied forces, in an ever-decreasing area. Now, the Volga worked against the Germans. They could not cross the river, because the Russians were on the other side, and they were surrounded by Russian forces outside the city. Another German army group tried to break through the Russian noose but was repulsed. The German commander, Paulus, did not receive permission from his superiors to break out of the trap, and he dithered until it was too late to act on a break-out effort.

The most famous soldier to emerge from this battle undoubtably was the Russian sniper Vassili Zaitsev. He was a peasant soldier who was extremely deadly with a rifle. He actually became an instructor of the sniper school the Russians set up in the ruins of a Stalingrad factory, and he proved to be the most proficient of the snipers who killed probably several thousand Germans there. He was supposed to have killed forty Germans in a ten-day period, out of a total 225 Germans that he killed. 

Zaitsev was a windfall for the Russian wartime propaganda machine, even as the Stalingrad battle was raging. He became a genuine Russian war hero. He is the central story in the Hollywood film "Enemy at the Gates", which depicts Zaitsev's love affair in the rubble of the city with army volunteer Tania Chernova. Zaitsev later wrote about his war experiences, including the famous "duel" depicted in the film, with a German master sniper named Major Konings, or Konig, or Koning (Craig spells it "Konings"). According to 
Craig, Konings was dispatched to Russia in order to kill Zaitsev, after he became famous for killing Germans by the score. Konings and Zaitsev eventually found themselves stalking each other and only one was going to survive. Craig's book, which covers the "duel" in three or four pages, was not the main source of material for the film. The filmmakers supposedly relied more on David L. Robbins' "War of the Rats", named after the name used by German soldiers to describe fighting in this battleground of city ruins. 

The edition of "Enemy at the Gates" I read is described as the movie "tie-in", containing pictures of Jude Law and Joseph Fiennes on the cover. I really don't care much for editions called "movie tie-in", do you? Just let me read the book the way the publisher's original art was used. The cover of this book contains the notation "An inspiration for the major motion picture...", evidence that it was not the main source material for the film.

The doomed German army continued to fight on until, by the end of January, 1943, its last remnants were about to be overrun. The mad dictator at the German command post at the Wolfs Lair in East Prussia forbade surrender. Hitler then cabled an order to Paulus which promoted him to the exalted rank of Field Marshal. This was not an empty gesture; it was a calculated attempt to force Paulus' suicide. No German Field Marshal had ever surrendered to the enemy, and the implication was clear that Paulus should give the Nazis a morale boost by making himself a martyr and going down in flames with his heroic army. A physically and psychologically haggard Paulus instead contacted Zhukov and surrendered. Craig notes Hitler's reaction to this attempt by Paulus to save the remnants of his depleted command from annihilation with the quote about the heroism of his soldiers being "nullified by one single characterless weakling .." (p. 383).

 Craig drives the full impact of this moment in history home in his description of the actions of soldiers in all ranks of the Wermacht, from privates to generals, committing suicide with their weapons as the Russians closed in on their hiding places. Many thousands of Germans did surrender. Some were kept in Stalingrad by the Russians to help in rebuilding the city; probably none survived the hard labor and disease that afflicted them. The remaining prisoners were scattered to more than twenty camps ranging from the Arctic Circle to the southern deserts. Again, Craig lets the impact of the predicament of these prisoners take effect on the reader. The surviving German and other Axis prisoners were about to leave one scene of constant horror to a predicament of almost certain slow death to most of them. One of many graphic horror stories involves the macabre death struggle taking place inside train cars containing German prisoners on their way to Central Asia, where the occupants killed each other for bits of food thrown into their cars every two days. 

Craig writes that more than four hundred thousand of the five hundred thousand German, Italian, Rumanian and Hungarian prisoners were allowed to perish, mostly by starvation, by the Russians from February to April of 1943. Starting in May, the Russians made more attempts to provide for sustaining the remaining prisoners until the end of the war. These final survivors starting filtering home after May, 1945. No more than five thousand German soldiers ever returned home, of the 91,000 remaining prisoners.

William Craig provides an excellent history of the most costly battle, in terms of lives lost, ever. The general reader interested in World War II, or the Battle of Stalingrad in particular, will be exposed to the ugly reality of warfare as very few can describe it.