Rating: 2/5

I think the biggest problem that brings down any of the Darkover books is Bradley's reluctance to ever definitively nail down what exactly laran can and cannot do. I read this as part of an omnibus with The Forbidden Tower, and there's a note from the author in the beginning where she mentions that she doesn't really care that much about chronology when it would get in the way of a good story. And I can respect that viewpoint, even if world-building is my primary interest in fiction so inconsistencies get in the way of that, but here it leads to a lot of problems.

So the cat-people are invading, right? Okay, that's the basis of a good plot. Why are they here? Were they driven from their homelands by a harsh winter? Are they taking revenge on the humans for some imagined or real slight? Why did they kidnap a Keeper, and what do they need laran for?

Nah, none of that is important, because they're orcs who must be exterminated.

I get the desire to make aliens to be inscrutable and mysterious, especially since Darkover is theoretically set in a science fiction universe rather than a fantasy one. The cat-people aren't just cat people despite their appearance, they're of alien sapience and their appearance may or may not reflect on their behavior. But that's totally undermined by continued reference to behavior similar to Earth cats and by the fact that Damon is a Ridenow and can thus psychically communicate with nonhuman intelligences. He even brings it up multiple times during the narrative, but he never tries to use it. The cat-people are just fundamentally unknowable and therefore slaughter is justified.

I mean, from the cat-people's perspective, the humans are the aliens who showed up on their planet, drove them out of all the good hunting lands into caves on the fringes of habitable territory, and consider them little better than animals. I got really annoyed when the Dry-Towners showed up as the apparent masterminds behind the invasion, because it turns the cat-people into just idiot pawns rather than an aggrieved indigenous species seeking to reclaim what had been lost to them. 

As another inconsistency, which may come from The Spell Sword being written relatively early, I thought Keepers were supposed to have an unconscious, reflexive defensive mechanism to prevent them from being touched unwillingly. Rediscovery even has a Keeper burn someone else to death that she was in laran contact with as part of the backlash of her defenses, but here the cat-people steal Callista from her bed with no problems whatsoever. One of the interesting parts of fantasy is how society deals with people who have strong innate personal power--for example, the ability to set people on fire with your mind--and how that changes the way society relates to each other. Darkover's answer is usually "personal power cannot overcome human prejudice, so women still have narrow societal roles that they must decide between" and just adds "can set fire to people with her brain" as a possible female-oriented job. 

I think there's actually a lot that could be done with that message, and how Darkover keeps the old female choice between work or family since Keepers cannot have relationships at all while they're working the relays--literally, since they're trained to not feel desire. In the hands of someone like Ursula Le Guin, that might have actually been an issue The Spell Sword touched on, but as it is, how Callista seizes on Andrew as her savior and what she feels for him is just taken as given and good luck trying to explain it.

So why did this get two stars if it's full of so much inconsistency and doesn't touch on the parts that I would have found most interesting? I'd like to say that there's some major redeeming features that I haven't mentioned yet that pulled it out of the abyss, but I'd be lying. The truth is that I thought the romance between Callista and Andrew was touching. Yes, it makes no sense in context of the world, and yes, Andrew should have burst into flames the first time he actually touched her, to say nothing of trying to use her matrix. But I liked the relationship and the way it developed mostly at a distance, and so I'll give it small praise for that. 

One star for cuteness, and one star because it's the minimum that Goodreads allows for a book. I wouldn't recommend it even for Darkover fans, as if you're interested in romance there are far better books to read and if you're interested in Darkover there are far better books to read. Give this one a miss.

Next Review: The Forbidden Tower.