Rating: 4/5

Tomato Red: Daniel Woodrell's Tale of Leaving Home

Welcome to West Table, Missouri. Meet Sammy Barlach who's just hired on down at the dog food factory. It's Friday night. The Tequila and Meth have got Sammy flying, impressing new friends down at the bar. Wanting to fit in with the new gang, when one suggests Sammy burgle one of the town mansions, Sammy's up for it. But he hears the laughter of his new buddies and the roar of their pickup recede in the distance when they drop him off at his next crime scene.

Sammy manages to get inside and stay awake just long enough to recognize that the rich live a Helluva lot better than he does. But the problem with Meth is that although it will keep you going for days, ultimately you crash and Sammy crashes in someone else's house. Not a good thing--his rap sheet shows he's in for some long time away at the State pen if he's caught.

  
    I fell deep down in there, until this bright light raised me from sleep. Coming out of a pit such as that, you think the bright light could be God or a cop on patrol;...then my eyes got right and it was just a candle held in front of my face by a girl in a black gown with jewelry twinkling here and there and a young fella in a tuxedo that swallowed him, smoking a heavy white pipe with a face design sculpted around the bowl.

'Are you dangerous? the girl asked. 'You look dangerous.'

..."He just might do," the fella said. "He's got that 'born to lose and lose violently' air about him. "That's good."
  

Meet Jamalee and Jason Merridew, brother and sister, pranksters, both of them. It isn't their house either. Jamalee and Jason learn how the other half lives by breaking into the homes of the wealthy and studying their possessions.

Jamalee wants out of West Table bad. There's a better place outside West Table, outside the Ozarks. Jason is her ticket out of town. He's already a hair dresser in training down at Ramalee's Beauty Salon. He gave her that unique tomato red hair of hers, thank you very much. He's about the most gorgeous piece of man flesh in the county. All the ladies line up for Jason to shampoo their hair and purr with a contented smile on their faces while Jason's fingers massage their scalps.

The way Jamalee sees things, all she needs to do is get Jason out of town, set him up in business, the hair dressing business and the gigoloin' business and life will be easy street. The only problem is Jason is gay and isn't too keen on being a gigolo. Jamalee knows it's not easy being gay in West Table. That's the reason Sammy might be the right man to provide security for them.

When you get right down to the bottom of things though, at least around West Table, you are who you are based on where you're from. When you're the children of Bev Merridew the local prostitute a fellow can always count on when he's pinched in the crotch, and you live over in Venus Holler, the other half doesn't think you're much of anything.

Well, Sammy has no family he'll speak of, and he decides to join the Merridews. Goodhearted Bev provides beer and sympathy when she's not on business which is just fine with Sammy.

Jamalee, furthering her education, looks to take a job down at the Country Club as a server. Sammy and Jason accompany her to the club. There's not a chance in Hell Jamalee is going to get that job. She's Venus Holler trash. In revenge, Jamalee, Jason, and Sammy drive hogs over the Club's golf course during the night, ruining every hole. It's all whoopin' and hollerin' until the other half teach the folks at Venus Holler a lesson. 

One of the Merridews will die. Blood money will be paid. Those who live must decide the value of a human life. And Sammy Barlach will show you just how dangerous he can be.

This is my third Woodrell read. Each has been a unique experience with narrators distinct and different in voice. There is humor here, at first light, but turning from comedy to tragedy. While Thomas Wolfe told us you can't go home again, Daniel Woodrell let's us know that sometimes it's impossible to leave it without a price too high to pay.

Highly recommended.