Rating: 5/5

I read Morgan's Run during my sabbatical leave in New South Wales (Terrigal Beach) in early 2001, shortly after its publication in 2000. I had read Colleen McCullough's Thorn Birds (cheapo romance, IMO) and Tim, a very touching book with echoes of Algernon to me. I was amazed that it had so many details about an ancestor of McCullough's husband, the British convict Richard Morgan, his life as a free man in a good family, his imprisonment and then "transportation" on a ship in the First Fleet of settlers in Australia, and ending with the beginning of his life working his way to freedom there. 

I say I read it--I listened to the audio CD version. I think I bought it at a bookstore on the Rocks in Sydney but I may have bought it at the ABC (Australia Broadcasting Company) store in a mall near Terrigal. I had a fairly long drive each day to the Central Coast campus of the University of Newcastle where I was helping set up a center for early childhood research and thus I listened to a number of Australian novels and biographies. I focused a lot at the beginning on the original settlers, both convict and freeborn people. 

(Later, I focused on the Aboriginal history and also on current day novels. The Aboriginal histories included books by men and women of aboriginal heritage who had been "stolen" and given to non-aboriginal families. This was long before the movie Rabbitproof Fence but it was the kind of background for the movie.)

I have listened to it at least one more time after I returned to my home in Ann Arbor, Michigan, and now I am reading it in print. The focus for this reading was a new book by Kline, The Exiles, a Novel, which was set in 1840 and was about young women who were transported from England to Tasmania (Van Dieman's land at the time). Both books described their characters traveling in converted slave ships. The Kline book's description of the conditions in the slave ship were a bit better than Morgan's descriptions from the 1786-1787 period and "google" said that indeed the slave ships were improved by that more recent time period. However, there was one ship of women in the First Fleet but McCullough does not describe their conditions.

While my initiative was to compare the conditions aboard the slave ships, I have found I am reading for more about social conditions across the different settings, about British laws and courts, and male-female/LGBT relationships. I am definitely glad I decided to read Morgan's Run once again.