Rating: 4/5

I reached this book while pursuing two related topical lines: books about real-world Communist dystopias and books written by revolutionaries (dissidents). Scrisori catre Olga is a collection of letters written by Vaclav Havel to his wife Olga Havlová during 1979-1982, while he was imprisoned in various Czechoslovakian prisons. Overall, this is a rare glimpse into the personal life of the otherwise introverted Vasek.

The book presents a selection of over 140 letters, selected by the editors (by which criterion?!). Of these letters, the first about 130 introduce Havel the person, and some of his main ideas interspersed with daily and household life details. The latter 15 letters present a distillation of the ideas sprinkled until then in the regular letters. The letters are themselves samples, that is, the book only includes a selection of the text in each letter (again, selected by which criterion?!) I found the latter 15 letters rather unreadable, but enjoyed the first cca. 130.

Among many others, Scrisori catre Olga neighbors Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's work (about Russia), Gabriel Liiceanu's work and The Land of Green Plums (both Romania), The Aquariums of Pyongyang Ten Years in the North Korean Gulag (North Korea), Marzi (Poland), Stasiland (East Germany); and the excellent auto-biographies of Nelson Mandela and Mahatma Gandhi. Havel seems to be the more secluded of all the dissident figures in this list---the self-effacing man who does not even want to talk about group fight but rather about individual struggle for the right to individuality. (Havel also talks about the responsibility of fight, but never as a group undertaking against an unjust, totalitarian regime.)

The writing is warm, often passionate and wordy, yet also accessible and, at times, timid. I read the book over a 6-hour trip, half by plane half by train, with many short stops (so, no reading) for the latter.

There's quite a bit in this book about Havel the man: the commanding, perhaps even oppressive husband; the self-confessed OCD; the permanent complaints about nagging but not life-threatening illnesses; a brief biopic; an admission to various weaknesses, among which chief is low self-esteem; but also an intention to live a life of being nice to others, excessively polite, and respectful for authority (the irony!). 

As the main topics and concepts, the selected letters touch responsibility, individuality, religious belief, what adulthood (manhood) is about, becoming listless in face of adversity, structure in life, meaning of life, becoming cynical in face of adversity, and, of course, theater. I read intently the idea of "a structure of death", which discusses the evils of a community in which there is no free will (Havel talks about man as "cybernetic unit", a robot without emotion and personal needs beyond physiological and instructional). I was impressed by the frankness with which the author admits that theater was "just a job", which he liked but pursued only to the limits of his own pleasure. His insistence that his struggle has been very limited and purely motivated by his internal struggle is admirable and humbling. 

On the negative side, I thought many of the ideas discussed here were rather well-known in the 1980s and I found Havel somehow at a loss distinguishing between real life and the life of the playwright: he's often depicting a world inhabited by spectators, albeit participating spectators; often seeing stages and curtains; often discussing the use of structure and ceremony. (Yet Havel is ambivalent--or multi-valent--about theater, first admitting his life is not about being a theater professional, then claiming with rather flimsy support that theater is a unique art, then reneging theater once more, then redeeming it, then ...)

Overall, a very interesting read. Just read a bit of Havel, I know I'd like to read some more.