Rating: 5/5

THE SHADOW LINE: A CONFESSION

The novella opens up with a young narrator, who actually does a pretty good of explaining the novel’s title (the shadow line) in the first paragraph: 

" Only the young have such moments. I don’t mean the very young. No. The very young have, properly speaking, no moments. It is the privilege of early youth to live in advance of its days in all the beautiful continuity of hope which knows no pauses and no introspection.
One closes behind one the little gate of mere boyishness—and enters an enchanted garden. Its very shades glow with promise. Every turn of the path has its seduction. And it isn’t because it is an undiscovered country. One knows well enough that all mankind had streamed that way. It is the charm of universal experience from which one expects an uncommon or personal sensation—a bit of one’s own. One goes on recognizing the landmarks of the predecessors, excited, amused, taking the hard luck and the good luck together—the kicks and the half-pence, as the saying is—the picturesque common lot that holds so many possibilities for the deserving or perhaps for the lucky. Yes. One goes on. And the time, too, goes on—till one perceives ahead a shadow-line warning one that the region of early youth, too, must be left behind."

This is not a classical coming of age story, it is more a story of a man no longer ‘very young’ who is about to become ‘mature’ and ‘adult’ in the full sense of the word. This man decided to quit his job without any reason ( presumably being caught up in the restlessness of ‘not very young’ ) but soon he will be forced to mature- for what is more adult that command? With the help of captain Giles (an interesting fellow) he learns of a job that would otherwise be unknown to him- that of a captain. So, suddenly our narrator is promoted into a captain (his first such position) and sets off to command his ship. 

.A ship! My ship! She was mine, more absolutely mine for possession and care than anything in the world; an object of responsibility and devotion. She was there waiting for me, spell-bound, unable to move, to live, to get out into the world (till I came), like an enchanted princess. Her call had come to me as if from the clouds. I had never suspected her existence. I didn’t know how she looked, I had barely heard her name, and yet we were indissolubly united for a certain portion of our future, to sink or swim together!

The narrator/protagonist founds her to be a beauty indeed- but somewhat of a cursed beauty. Turns out that our femme fatale had quite a past- and she is about to cause more trouble. Soon the protagonist learns that the former captain had been mad. His first officer Mr. Burns, tells him the story in detail. Here we have a touch of ‘framed narrative’ but apart from that, the whole story is narrated by our protagonist. What follows is what could be described as ‘ghost story’ though Conrad was against that kind of reading. It seems that the ship is being haunted by the spirit of the dead captain. Now, I think that the writer meant this to be more psychological thriller than a paranormal story, but everyone is free to select a preferred reading. I personally think that the story is interesting enough from a psychological point of view, so I didn’t really read it as a ghost story- more like a story of men under severe psychological and physical pressure.

THE NARRATIVE AND THE PLOT

Unlike some of the other Conrad’s works, the narrative is neither framed nor very complex. Told by an unknown narrator, the narrative is actually pretty straight-forward and well-paced. Often Conrad’s novel have an unusual pacing. I have never had a problem with this, because when it comes to his novels, I always felt that his writing choices and his rhythm were justified. Often in his works, a slower introduction sets the atmosphere and lets you sink into the story really well. Likewise, a slower progress often provides a startling contrast to the end. However, here we have a simple story with a good rhythm. The plot is fairly simple but written flawlessly. The first person narrator is credible and well portrayed. His narrative voice makes perfect sense. The ending was masterfully written. It was not as mind-blowing as some of his endings, but it was perfect for this novella. All in all, the story was a great read as such and it gets extra points because it is well- Conrad.

MADNESS

If you pay attention to it, there is a lot of mentioning of ‘madness’ in the novel. Whether it is used for a dramatic effect or foreshadowing, I’m not sure, but the references are there early on. First, the narrator does something a bit crazy ( leaves his job) and gets call mad for it and then he suspects that captain Giles might be (despite being professionally very capable) a mad man. Soon he learns of his mistake and realizes that captain Giles was only looking out for him by discovering a job opportunity that would otherwise have been hidden from him. However, soon the protagonists says to captain Giles that the man who tried to hide the job from him (the steward) might be mad- for would risk losing his job to get rid of a minor nuisance? When the protagonist arrives to claim his ship, he learns that his predecessor was positively mad. During his voyage, he grows assured that Mr. Burns is mad as well. Finally, the protagonists doubts his own sanity. Charma- one might say. When you accuse everyone of madness, you get accused yourself. 

All in all, I found all that talk about madness fascinating, perhaps because I liked the way in which the sanity was at times questioned. I felt like Conrad was aiming at something more, making us question ourselves. Perhaps there are two shadow- lines that get examined in this novel, one is the line between ‘not very young’ and ‘mature’ and the other a line between sanity and madness. I think the issue of keeping one’s sanity was well addressed. It is important for the dramatic aspect of the story but it doesn’t stop at that. You can see the protagonist slowly maturing. It seems like it took him ‘almost going mad himself’ to actually achieve more clearness and maturity in his thinking. When the protagonist first beholds the ship, he acts like an enamoured schoolboy. Was that the cause of his perhaps rushed departure from port? However, with time (not a great amount of time actually), our captain grows more ‘mature’ and acts according to his position. 

There is one character that is somewhat of an ideal- the character Ransome. I was thinking how perhaps Ransome is presented as an ideal of a mentally stable man. Under extreme pressure, he remains calm. His calmness has a profound impact on our protagonist- the captain. Ironically, this man Ransome- – the ship’s cook, the only one who keeps his complete calm, has a serious heart condition. At one point in the novel, he risks his life-is it an act of nobility or madness? Where is the line? Similarly, is the crew mad to trust the captain? Is the captain mad to trust the crew? Is he mad to trust himself? As I said, sanity is examined in an interesting way. It is not directly talked about, but during that inferno journey in particular, one gets to see a fascinating exploration of human psychology. 

THE CHARACTERS

I already said a bit about the characters when I spoke about the madness element in this book. For a Conrad’s book, there are not that many of them. In addition, because of the shortness of the book, they are not described in great detail. Nevertheless, a few of them do stand out. Captain Giles, for example, serves both as an initiator of the plot and the one to end it. The narrator’s conversation with him closes the circle of the narrative, sort of speak. Mr. Burns and Ransome are important characters as well. There are other members of ship’s crew that are identified and described but they don’t have a vital role as these two do. These other crew men do make the story seem more credible and add to the atmosphere, but they are not independent characters as such. On overall, I would say that Conrad managed to portray his characters very well, developing them as the story progressed. No lengthy descriptions and long meditations on human nature this time- but that doesn’t mean he is not as good as a writer to make his characters come to life-for he sure is.

As to the protagonist of the novel, I felt that by the end of the story he was a well-rounded character- a lot sadder, but also a lot wiser. I wonder, though, what is our narrator confessing to? What does he felt guilty for? The fact he didn’t check the medicine? Something he should have perhaps thought of, but is it really something he should feel so guilty about? The fact he didn’t think that much of the men aboard the ship and was at first mostly enchanted with HER (the ship)? As a captain he should have taken better care of his crew and not be so restless to get HER to the sea- or is it really a combination of all of these things? Don’t we all do things that we regret and are ashamed of? I suppose he had as much to regret as the next man.

THE SEA AND THE SEAMAN

Among other things, this is definitely a novel about seaman. What it means to be a seaman, what it feels like, what is the code of conduct- you’ll learn something about it here. If you enjoy a good mariner’s tale, look no further. You will find absolutely convincing descriptions of life at sea. There are few writers who write so eloquently about the sea. In this novel, descriptions of the sea and life on board are spot on. You really have a feeling like you’re there, with the crew, caught up with them in that windless inferno. 

THE BALANCE OF POWER

There is no doubt that there is also a question of power here. The narrator compares himself – the captain with a monarch. He maintains that a captain must appear like a monarch, a God sent figure to the sailors- because they do not understand the process by which the company elects one. I found that really interesting, especially in the latter context of the story. The first officer Mr. Burns apparently wanted to become a captain himself- whether from ambition or simply because he by that time felt responsible for the ship is unclear. There is a bit of struggle for dominance between the two. 

Our protagonist commands the men- the ultimate responsibility is on him. I don’t think he realizes (until later on in the story) what exactly does this mean. Our protagonists is literally responsible for their lives. The relationship between the crew and the captain can be a metaphor for the balance of power but even on its own it is very interesting to observe. 

NO FEMALE CHARACTERS- OR ARE THERE?

Unless we count one mysterious reference (to a woman late ‘crazy’ captain was involved with), there is no mention of women in this novel. The narrator himself admits that when Mr. Burns pleaded with him to take him on for the sake of his wife and kids, he felt nothing- but when Burns addressed him as a fellow seaman, he was moved into action. The narrator showed no wish of getting married in the novel (actually thought it was a bizarre notion), perhaps because he married to his true love- the sea. 

The only ‘she’ in this book is the ship….and she is a beauty. I was honestly moved by the way narrator describes being nervous as a lover when he was going to see HER- a ship he was to command. The writer/narrator keeps on comparing the ship with a beautiful woman. In retrospective, there might be some symbolism there. The late captain was ‘perhaps’ ruined because he was seduced by a woman, in a similar way our captain/narrator gets seduced by the ship. So, you can find the metaphorical Eve, sort of speak. Still, basically, it is a novel without female characters. Something that I don’t mind at all, because I’m not a militant feminist who is obsessed with that sort of thing- but just so you know.

TO WHOM WOULD I RECOMMEND THIS BOOK

Firstly, I would recommend it to those who want to read something from Conrad but are not fans of the complex narrative or lengthy descriptions that this writer often employs. In other words, if you struggled with his other works or even gave up on reading him, perhaps this is a good choice for you.

Secondly, if you’re looking for something a bit shorter but still substantial, this novella might be just what you need. It is not a difficult read as it comes with a fairly simple plot, but at the same time, it is profound enough to challenge your brain cells. I absolutely feel that it is one of those books that can offer you multiple readings. 

Thirdly, if you are a Conrad fan, they you should read it just because. It may not be the best or the most profound thing written by him, yet it is definitely worth reading. 

CONCLUSION

I would describe The Shadow Line more as a psychological thriller meets The Rhyme of The Ancient Mariner that a ‘coming of age’ story but I can see how some might read it as a YA/ghost/ adventure tale. This novella is not as complex as some of other Conrad’s work, but the writing is (in my view) simply brilliant. For when a good story meets with excellent writing, you do get something noteworthy. It is so well written that I deem this novella worthy of a five star mark. Every sentence seems to matter and the timing throughout the novel is pretty much perfect. 

The characters are interesting and well portrayed. One gets to know them more through their actions and thoughts, then through long descriptions, though. The psychological depth with which Conrad’s usually draws his characters is somewhat missing (perhaps due to the brevity of the novella), but the atmosphere of the book makes up for it. There is that quality of timelessness that I love about his works. Moreover, it is more melancholic than pessimistic, not as dark as some of his other works- and that’s not bad for a change. As brief as this novel was, I still had that priceless feeling of glancing into human souls- and what more could a girl ask for?