Rating: 3/5

Each Christmas season I try to read or listen to several Christmas books. I found a copy of “A Return to Christmas” at a local used book store and decided to give it a try. I was familiar with Heimerdinger’s “Tennis Shoes” series so I thought I would see what kind of Christmas story he could write.

This is a story of a Christmas miracle – a very unlike one that rekindles a family’s Christmas spirit and even reunites them in the conclusion of the story. 

The story is about a wealthy couple that lost the desire for Christmas when one of their twin boys died in a Christmas time accident. Ever since the tragic accident, Christmas has been a time of guilt and remembrance of the event rather than a time of celebration, love, and remembering the birth of Christ.

Due to some happenstances that leave the reader doubting the possibility of the events of the story, the family starts to enjoy the Christmas season when their son is abducted and an identical looking boy takes his place in their home. Eventually the son escapes from his abductor and returns to his home to find that, surprise, his abductor and the other boy were stealing some of the family’s valuables. The daughter of the family happens to come home and sees that something is wrong in the home and calls the police. When the police come and the family returns to their home an unexpected surprise is revealed. I won’t ruin the surprise for those who might want to read this book. 

I thought the book relied upon too much coincidence for the story’s plot. I know miracles are accepted and expected in Christmas stories but the circumstances in this book were beyond a miracle and an excess of unbelievable conditions to drive the story to completion.

The story was well written and had compelling characters, but I could not get over how everything depended upon luck and unbelievable circumstances. Moreover, I could not buy the fact that the family could not tell that the boy in their home was not their son even though he looked like him.

I recommend this book to those who enjoy reading Christmas stories, especially if you happen to be a fan of Heimerdinger’s other stories or if you like having a Christmas story the is placed in Utah. I would rate this as an average Christmas story but is worth a quick read.

Other books I’ve read by author
None