Rating: 3/5

For 2020, I decided to reread (in publication order) all the Bantam-era Star Wars books that were released between 1991 and 1999; that shakes out to 38 adult novels and 5 anthologies of short stories &amp; novellas.

This week’s focus: Wedge’s Gamble by Michael A. Stackpole.

SOME HISTORY:

After introducing us to the next gen Rogues in the first X-Wing book, Stackpole turns around and gives us a book with very little starfighter action. Wedge’s Gamble almost serves as a sneak peek of Aaron Allston’s pilot/commando Wraiths, because the Rogues spend most of the book undercover on Coruscant. The title is a little confusing, though: if anything this is Admiral Ackbar and the Provisional Council’s gamble, not Wedge’s! Wedge’s Gamble made it to number fourteen on the New York Times paperback bestseller list for the week of May 26, 1996.

MY RECOLLECTION OF THE BOOK:

This book felt much more familiar than Rogue Squadron had, which leads me to believe that I probably skipped all the setup of book 1 and started with book 2 for my past rereads. We get more insight into Tycho’s situation, and a whole lot of intrigue.

A BRIEF SUMMARY:

The New Republic takes the first steps in invading Coruscant, and the Rogues are sent undercover to gain vital intelligence. But Ysanne Isard has been planning for their arrival, and is waiting to unleash the Krytos Virus on the unsuspecting non-human populace...

THE CHARACTERS:

Wedge has a lot on his plate in this book, but I felt like he handled everything well. I love his Colonel Roat disguise, and I’m pretty sure we’ll see it again. I’m less sure about his reasoning for keeping Tycho and Emtrey’s presence quiet; that just seemed to lead directly to Tycho’s arrest at the end.

Corran is much improved from the first book. He’s matured and is no longer an arrogant loner. While I think he’s needlessly harsh/distrusting of Tycho, he’s a more sympathetic protagonist this time around. He’s still not my favorite, though, mostly because I’m not a fan of cop characters. (Someone will yell at me that he was an investigator, but that just meant he wasn’t in uniform--still a cop!) A little progress is made in Corran’s love life as well; Erisi propositions him again, he turns her down, he talks to Mirax, but then he’s presumed dead.

We get a lot more about Tycho’s backstory, both from Tycho himself and from Winter. It makes Tycho’s plight all the more poignant. Here is a man who lost everything in a single second, joined the Rebellion, and then was captured by Isard. He doesn’t think he’s a spy, unwilling or otherwise, but that’s the worst part: Isard’s operatives are completely unaware of their programming until they’re activated. But Tycho’s repeated assurances of his innocence, as well as all the times he’s saved the Rogues, makes me 100% sure that he is not the spy. (And interestingly enough, book 2 ends with the spy’s identity still unknown!)

Gavin gets a bit more development than “teenage kid from Tatooine.” He’s never seen anything like Coruscant before, and he behaves in a believably naïve manner. I wish we could have gotten a little more of his relationship with his wingmate, though; at this point, we still know very little about Shiel. We also meet four new Rogues &amp; soon-to-be Rogues. They’re not much different from the pilots they replaced, though. Instead of hotshot pilot Bror Jace we have…hotshot pilot Pash Cracken. Aril Nunb, a female Sullustan, takes the place of Andoorni Hui, a female Rodian. And our soon-to-be Rogues consist of another Bothan (Asyr Sei’lar) and Lujayne’s sister (Inyri Forge).

I was a little confused about Bror Jace’s fate. Wedge mentions the people that Rogue Squadron had lost in a throwaway line, and Jace was included. “Didn’t he go back to Thyferra?” I thought. It wasn’t until a few chapters later that Corran gave us the full story, and I really wish that the explanation had been pushed up earlier in the novel.

We’re introduced to Iella Wessiri, Corran’s former CorSec partner—now working for the New Republic. We are reintroduced to Winter, Leia’s eidetic aide. Iella will become a romantic interest for Wedge at a later point, and Winter and Tycho clearly have some past history.

Isard is undoubtedly intelligent, but we don’t know tons about her. At this point, she hasn’t developed much beyond “intense evil lady.” Kirtan Loor still feels like a lesser evil, a less threatening evil; I find it telling that when Corran sees him, he just wants to flipping murder him. Derricote is awful in a different way--he feels no compunction in creating a deadly virus that can liquidate someone. Gross.

Zekka Thyne just seems stupid. He’s stupid enough to antagonize Corran, and talk back to Loor. Are we seriously meant to believe that he was a high-ranking Black Sun official? That said, his death at Inyri’s hands felt too sudden to me. Her change of heart came a bit too fast.

ISSUES:

I find the essentialness of Rogue Squadron on Coruscant a little improbable. The Provisional Council has to send the Rogues to find out all sorts of information about planetary defenses and the mood of the people. But we promptly meet Iella and Winter, both working undercover for NR Intelligence. So...why didn’t they just rely on the intelligence provided by the operatives already in place? Why all the focus on discretely inserting the Rogues if they already have capable people on the ground?

Also improbable: Corran’s speeder bike chase that somehow involves all the Rogues. He’s running from Thyne, sends another speeder through the window where Wedge and co. are meeting, and then continues into Invisec where the rest of Rogue Squadron has been cornered by stormtroopers. While this did bring all the Rogues together, it was a bit too coincidental for me.

Borsk Fey’lya also comes up with a plan where Black Sun criminals will be unleashed on Coruscant to cause mayhem. This felt particularly jarring since I had just read Shadows of the Empire. Why would Leia (of all people) approve a plan to revitalize Black Sun? You know how bad they are! And if the probable outcome was that they’d cause mayhem, they really don’t. Thyne tries to kill Corran, Moff Vorru takes the lead, and they end up helping the Rogues.

I have a few concerns about the viability of Isard’s Krytos trap. She wanted the virus to be airborne, but Derricote was only able to produce a fluid-borne virus. Think something like cholera: you can become infected by coming into contact with a sick person’s vomit or blood, or if the water supply is contaminated. That seems like something that would be easier to combat--isolate the sick, and test the water supply for contamination.

On the whole, though, Isard’s virus is sadistically genius. It doesn’t have to be fatal, because there is a cure; but bacta is both limited and expensive, so the New Republic could very well bankrupt itself in trying to treat everyone. And the fact that it seems to solely affect nonhumans will likely raise tensions between the local populations.

NAZI GERMANY PARALLELS

Stackpole does some interesting worldbuilding with Coruscant’s non-human population. They’re forced to live in the Alien Protection Zone, or Invisec. It’s pretty much a ghetto: they’re walled in, living conditions are very poor, and it’s not safe. The contrast between the rest of Coruscant and this segregated neighborhood is very stark.

I also liked the insights we got about the Empire. When Wedge is entering Coruscant in his Colonel Roat disguise in Chapter 14, he thinks about the people within the Empire:

“The very same people he considered willfully ignorant would find him deluded and misguided. Half of them would deny there were any problems inherent in the Imperial system--as if slavery, anti-alien sentiments, and weapons that destroyed planets could be so easily forgotten. The other half might admit there were problems, but they would shy from accepting open insurgency against the legitimate government as a solution to them. For those people, working within the system was the way to achieve change, but they failed to realize that when a system had become as corrupt as the Empire, significant change was impossible without a shattering of the power structure.”

Usually, I alternate my reading each week between my Star Wars book du jour and something else. So it felt particularly prescient that this week, my other book was about tourists in interwar Germany (Travelers in the Third Reich: The Rise of Fascism: 1919–1945). Aesthetics-wise, the Empire has always been “Nazis, but in space,” and that never felt more evident than in this book. The Empire is racist and bigoted and completely rotten at the core.

IN CONCLUSION:

I could probably pick apart the logic in Wedge’s Gamble in even greater detail. (The Corusca Rainbow is waiting on the outskirts of the Coruscant system, to drag the other ships out of hyperspace if the shields aren’t down. Surely that’s too far to be able to surveil the situation? But I digress.) 

Does it make any sense for Rogue Squadron to be undercover in this one? Not really. Did it have exciting action scenes and some much needed character development? Yes! So I guess I will rate this one: far-fetched in concept but surprisingly enjoyable in execution.

Next up: the second book in the Black Fleet Crisis trilogy, Shield of Lies by Michael P. Kube-McDowell.

My YouTube review: https://youtu.be/2ENEGzVrKLA

Attempt #1 at making Ryshcate (a failure!): https://youtu.be/wZYc48zmNBw