Rating: 5/5

5★
“It was something she had not expected ever to have. She was, you might say, a woman who recognized the value of half a loaf.”

That’s Mercy Stone, who is as surprised as everyone else by being Cyler Goodwill's object of adoration. She is a large, ungainly woman whose idea of heaven is eating, cooking, and eating some more. 

“Her inability to feel love has poisoned her, swallowed down along with the abasement of sugar, yeast, lard, and flour; she knows this for a fact.”

She grew up in the Stonewall Orphans’ Home where those who were from unmarried mothers were given the surname Stone.

“She was left when only a few days old, wrapped in a flannel blanket—for the June nights could be cool—and placed in the old flour barrel that sat close by the back door of the institution. These flour-barrel babies, as they came to be called, were looked after by the township, given an elementary schooling, taught a trade, and sent at fourteen or fifteen into employment—”

Her housekeeping skills were such that she continued to live there and keep the place in order. When she was 28, who should come to reset the stone in a doorway but local mason Cuyler Goodwill. 

“he was moved beyond anything he had imagined by her sheer somatic presence. Her rippling generosity of flesh and the clean floury look of her bare arms as she pointed out the irregularity in the door framing stirred him deeply, as did her puffed little topknot of hair, her puff of face, her puffed collar and shoulders—framing an innocence that seemed to cry out for protection. He yearned to put his mouth against the inside shadow of her elbow, or touch with his fingertips the hemispheres of silken skin beneath her eyes, their exquisite convexity.”

By the time he’d had coffee and some of her freshly baked brown sugar slice, he was a goner. I know you didn't need to read all that, but here’s the comparison.

“. . . a man who is short of shank and narrow of shoulder, but this rather abbreviated body is not what people register. People look into Cuyler Goodwill’s small dark compacted face, wound tight like a clock, full of urgency and force, and think: here stands a man who is vividly alive.”

(The contrast between them and Cuyler's love of Mercy reminded me of Pop and Ma Larkin in The Darling Buds of May by H.E. Bates.)

They are the parents of Daisy, whose story this is. She tells some in first person, some in the third person. She speaks of “my mother” and then goes on to describe in detail how her mother felt while she was cooking and tasting and eating, as an omniscient narrator would.

This is a biography-cum-autobiography of a woman looking back over the 20th century at her life and family. But it is also a novel about all of these people, including conflicting views about personalities and events, as you will find in any family. We each remember things differently.

For a while, we are reading how wonderfully gifted Cuyler Goodwill is at masonry and that he becomes an acclaimed public speaker. Then later, somewhere along the way, we hear someone complaining about his waffling on and on too long all the time as if it’s common knowledge.

We're never quite sure what the truth is, but it's in there somewhere. In her afterword, the author says: 

“. . . her life corresponds, more or less, with the span of the century, posing the question of where these last hundred years have delivered women, especially those women who failed to make the public record.”

Perhaps as a way to make this part of the public record, or at least to seem such, the author decided to add a family tree and photographs. They certainly make Daisy's history seem real, but I don’t know who the people actually are. Perhaps someone does.

This is a fascinating read and a great study of human nature. I kept being reminded of the old saying “There’s no accounting for taste”. There are some unlikely liaisons. These people are individuals, very much of their times, who entertain us through their whole lives. I’ve not really shared anything of the story of Daisy’s life, but it’s easy enough to find.

I loved this worthy winner of the 1995 Pulitzer Prize.