Rating: 4/5

I want to start off this review by saying that I hadn't planned to read this book at all, but it so happened that I needed a light book to bring to highschool to read when I felt bored and I was kind of feeling the horror genre, so, naturally, I asked Mum – the biggest fan of horror content that I know. Originally, I asked her if she had Carrie in her library, but no luck. Instead, she recommended me John Saul's books, since she had a fair share of them. So, here I am. 
 First of all, I need to say that I had expected this book to be a little more scary, though I cannot deny its fair dose of creepiness. It wasn't frightening in the ghost-demon-evil entity; no, it was its almost realistic premise that send shivers down my spine. For those unfamiliar with the story, the main character and his family move to Silverdale – a perfect city where everything goes just right. Only... that it is too perfect. It is what happens behind the walls of Tarren Tech and Rocky Mountain High that builds the creepy factor of this story. Who would have thought that these so trusted institutes would  experiment on the children of their employees in order to try and cure different kind of diseases and chronic sicknesses?  
 Everything I will be saying from now on is spoiler-material, so read at your own caution. So, as I was saying, the story is both chilling and thrilling because it uses the premise of experimenting on humans and what they become after this lab-rat game. The way the football team was acting on the field was concerning ever since the beginning, and the suggestion of their dangerous roughness was enhanced by the physical descriptions of abnormally big and muscular teen boys, capable of hurting their adversaries critically – thing that, ironically, happened in the second chapter. Not only did Jeff LaConner, the MVP of Silverdale's football team, send Rick Ramirez into a coma, but he also began transforming, becoming more and more dangerous as time passed by; he threatened and hurt Linda Harris after she cordially broke up with him, he pushed his mother, causing her to fall down and break an arm, and he beat Mark until he was barely breathing. With each and every single day, he became more and more agressive, though the changes were not only of psychological nature, but also physical – eyes deepening into the orbits of his head, jaw growing sharper, fingers elongating etc. And all of these changes were caused by the treatment he had undergone at the sportive clinic of Marty Ames. 
 Surprisingly or not, Blake Tanner, the father of our protagonist, signs Mark up to undergo the same treatment received by Jeff LaConner, not knowing the dark secret that laid behind it. You can all imagine what happened after – same fits of anger, same bloodthirst, same physical transformations. The hormones that were introduced in their bodies turned them into humanoid beasts that ressembled monkeys, but, of course, no one could know what happened to the boys. No one could find out what TarrenTech was doing behind closed doors. So, naturally, they liquidated anyone that tried to reveal scandalous information about their company – they sent Charlotte LaConner to the sanatorium, they killed Doctor MacCallum, they were about to get rid of Mark's mother too if she weren't to escape (though they had eventually killed her). They came up with stories for people's disappearances and, in the end, everyone bought it.
 This is why the story is scary. It is frightening because of how easy people can be manipulated by a higher power. It is chilling because history proved that experimenting on humans was something that had actually happened. It is horrendous because we have no idea what happens behind closed doors. And this is why John Saul has done a great job writing this book.