Rating: 5/5

It comes as no surprise to discover that this outstanding British children's novel, which chronicles the childhood experiences of a young German Jewish girl named Anna, whose family must flee their comfortable home shortly before the 1933 election and resultant Nazi rise to power, is based upon Judith Kerr's own life-story. So convincing is it, so real does it feel, that I found that I had to continually remind myself that it was fiction, rather than autobiography. Opening in Berlin, where the oblivious young Anna is more concerned with school than with Hitler, who seems a distant disturbance in the adult world around her, rather than an immediate concern in her own life, the story moves on to Switzerland, where her family settle for a time. Unable to go back to Germany to collect the belongings - including Anna's stuffed pink rabbit - that they left behind, and unable to earn a sufficient living, the family move on to Paris, where Anna's writer father briefly finds work for a German expatriate newspaper being published there. When even this small source of revenue dries up, the family must move on again, this time to England.

With its distinctly memorable title and its influential role in the teaching of World War II history to both British and German schoolchildren, When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit is one of those books that I have long been meaning to read, making its selection as our November title over in The Children's Fiction Book-Club to which I belong particularly fortunate. By turns humorous and heartbreaking, it is a story of one family who, despite confronting terrible times, managed to stick together and to flourish. Although the historical details are specific to a particular time and place, many of the general experiences that Anna and her family confront - trying to learn new languages and to find new friends, in strange places; trying to find a job and make connections, in one's field of work; confronting a significant loss of affluence, and learning to make do with less - will be familiar to refugees and immigrants the world over.

Stealing 'Pink Rabbit' is clearly not the worst of Hitler's crimes, but then, this is not a book about the Holocaust. It is a book about the refugee experience of one fairly well-to-do family in pre-WWII days, and is told from the perspective of the nine-year-old daughter of that family. Although the more disturbing realities of what is going on back in Germany do enter the story - most notably, in the tragic figure of Onkel Julius, a family friend and naturalist who does not flee Germany when he has the chance, and who sees his entire world destroyed, even to the point that he is forbidden to visit his beloved animals at the Berlin Zoo - those realities are fairly distant. As they would be to the child narrator, living in safety in Switzerland, Paris, and England. I think that it is this very quality, this feeling of distance from the full horrors of the war (which, after all, hadn't happened yet!) and the Nazi regime, that makes this an ideal introduction to the topic for younger readers, and am bemused to note that some reviewers have taken the author to task for not writing a story horrific enough to suit their taste.

Highly, highly recommended, to all young readers who enjoy historical fiction, and who are interested in the story of World War II. When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit will serve as an excellent entree - truthful, sometimes tragic, but often hopeful - to a very disturbing moment in history. For my part, I intend to read the two sequels, 
  The Other Way Round
 and 
  A Small Person Far Away
.