Rating: 5/5

18 February 2026

It was an interesting experience to read this book in the context of still grieving a serious (and seriously hurtful) situationship, because while Helen/Lena running back to a fuckboy fifteen years after the original crime is a bit eye-rolly, it’s also so emotionally legible. Lines like this:

‘ ‘Tell me,’ Kit asked again. ‘What do you like doing if you won’t come out with me?’ ‘I live my life the best I can,’ her mother said. And Kit felt a shock at the faraway look that came over Helen McMahon’s face as she said it.’

and this:

‘Louis Gray, the man she had wanted since she was twenty- three? The man she had still wanted on the day she married Martin McMahon when she was twenty- five? The man she had thought of with her eyes tightly closed every time that Martin made love to her.’

in my current context hit really hard. Granted, I don’t have to marry a man I ‘like fine’ just to ensure my economic security, which is Helen’s strenuous advice to her daughter. Instead I can have emotionally and physically unfulfilling one-night stands where I too close my eyes and dissociate to the man I really want to be with. Truly some experiences transcend time and era.

‘Lena realised she had been acting all day. Acting since she got up and told Louis that she had slept so well and happily in his arms. When she told Ivy she was just sweeping the office and making the tea because she didn’t want to seem to have a better job than Louis had. She had been acting a whole series of little charades to clients who phoned, to job seekers who came in, promising everyone that huge opportunities existed. Was this what it was going to be like from now on? There had been so many years of acting already in Lough Glass.’

This is me at work (not really the solution Helen thinks it is!).

‘‘Cold comfort as they say. Believe me, Lena, very cold. When I think of what I could have had.’ ‘And did you think… will she… suppose she…’ ‘It’s too late, love. I made my decision. I let go of my chance.’ There was a silence. ‘I know what you’re telling me,’ Lena said eventually. ‘You have him, you love him, you’ve always loved him. If you ring them at home, you’ll have lost everything.’ ‘So I have to fake being dead?’ ‘You never pretended to be dead. You left a letter telling what you did. You can’t be blamed for what they think.’ ‘Kit and Emmet?’ Lena’s face was white. ‘This way they’ll remember you with love, not hate.’ ‘I don’t think I can do it.’ ‘I’ve seen you look at him. You’ll do it,’ said Ivy.’

And yes, there are many reprehensible things I would to do get my ex back. Lena has my full understanding here.

‘Louis was in many ways a child himself; he would not want to share this part of her with Kit and Emmet. She loved and needed him so much, it would be an act of folly to weep and cling to him and tell him how much she missed her children. It would be to tell him that he was not enough for her, that the decision to go with him had involved too much sacrifice. And that was not true.’

This is a common theme in Binchy’s work because it’s a common theme with men in general; the requirement of women to protect them from any but the most basic emotional labour.

‘‘Work, is it?’ Grace asked as her firm fingers massaged Lena’s scalp. ‘No,’ Lena muttered into the towel as she leaned over the basin. ‘No, work runs itself.’ ‘Me too,’ Grace said. ‘Funny isn’t it? Men make such a big deal about work. To women like you and me it’s nothing. Nothing at all.’

YES.

‘Years ago, when she had told Martin McMahon that she couldn’t marry him because she still loved the memory of another man, he had said in a puzzled way that surely this wasn’t love, it was infatuation. At the time it had irritated her terribly. It was so silly to try to define things by words, she had said. What did one person mean by infatuation or obsession and another mean by love? The whole thing couldn’t be tidied away with neat little labels.’

This is so smart. Given the state of modern dating I’m inclined to think this, too, is a universal experience; the ‘infatuation’ of women for the potential of men who never live up to it.

I just love Binchy’s sense of humour:

‘‘They don’t unless they’re pregnant,’ Kit said with spirit. ‘We could get pregnant. That would be a great idea,’ Philip said. ‘Jesus!’ said the waitress. ‘I’ll come back when you’ve something less dramatic on your mind, like what you’re going to have for your supper.’’

‘Her eyes might give her away. People often recognised others by the eyes alone. She stopped in Boots and bought a pair of sunglasses. ‘Not much call for those these days,’ said the young girl selling them. ‘I’m going to rob a bank,’ Lena explained. ‘Want anyone to help you carry it all away?’ the girl said. Louis was right about the English. They were dying to talk; it was just that they needed someone to start them off.’

‘You lied to them too. This is a really good smart dress. It cost a fortune. Did you steal it?’ ‘You have a very diseased mind. Will you shut up and let me enjoy my father’s wedding.’ At that moment they saw the small congregation turning around. Maura Hayes was walking up the church with her brother. Martin McMahon stood beaming at the altar rails. ‘She looks great,’ Clio whispered. ‘That’s a terrific outfit.’ ‘She probably stole it. Most of us did,’ Kit said loftily.’

And I just love this description of ‘true’ love:

‘Just in case Maura knelt beside him and kissed his bloodstained face. ‘You’re going to be fine, Martin. I’ve seen Peter’s eyes, he means it. And I love you, I love you with all my heart. You make me sing with happiness.’ Emmet McMahon and Peter Kelly exchanged glances. They weren’t meant to hear such a declaration of love. It was very private and neither of them would ever refer to it again.’

For some reason I always imagine Martin Clunes as Doc Martin as this Martin. (fuck that’s a lot of Martins)

7 August 2021

I love Maeve Binchy. I consider her one of the best, and simultaneously one of the most under-rated, Irish authors of the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. She’s particularly good at this late fifties era, which presumably echoes her own experience. As a documenter of this hinge point, where the Catholic church still held an iron sway and sex before marriage was both the worst sin and the one that preoccupied people most by the committing of it, she’s unparalleled.

I’ve also noted that she is always telling two versions of the same story. (This isn’t a criticism, merely an observation.) There’s always a Sexy, Untrustworthy man. The heroine always falls for him; whether he’s endgame or not depends on which side of the story Binchy’s telling. Sometimes, it’s the story of reforming the rake (as in this case). Mostly, though, it’s about learning that kindness trumps hotness; that ‘settling’ for the ‘boring’ option, also known as ‘safer’, is actually a wise and valiant choice. 

I suspect - although it doesn't matter - that Binchy at one point had her heart broken by a Sexy, Untrustworthy man, and later thought better of her entanglement with him. Whether this was before or after she married her ‘beloved’ Gordon Snell, to whom most of her books are dedicated - or whether Snell is actually a reformed Sexy, Untrustworthy man - are not questions I can or want to answer. 

In terms of the engine driving the novels, it’s indisputable that Binchy interrogates the appeal of the Sexy, Untrustworthy man from many angles. Sometimes he’s thoughtless, a Bingley-esque character, like Jack in ‘Circle of Friends’. Sometimes he’s driven by self-interest, like Danny in ‘Tara Road’, Neil in ‘Scarlet Feather’, or Louis here in ‘The Glass Lake’. Sometimes he’s actively malignant, like Kerry in ‘Firefly Summer’ or Gerry in ‘Echoes’. Rarely he gets the girl, like Stevie in this case, which is a magnificent bait-and-switch and used as a direct parallel to how Louis treats Lena. I argue that Tom in ‘Scarlet Feather’ is a Sexy man who is also Trustworthy, which is a rare combination for Binchy. 

She’s not cynical about it; she’s not Barbara Pym. There’s plenty of evidence, in the books and the short stories, that Binchy strongly feels that love is a created force, and doesn’t and shouldn’t depend on fleeting attributes like Sexiness. She assigns falling for the Sexy, Untrustworthy man to youth and innocence - or, to put it another way, to ignorance. The revelation that kindness in a partner is worth all the sex appeal in the world is Binchy’s state of grace.

The reason I find ‘Circle of Friends’ to be Binchy’s best novel is that it’s the bravest. Benny’s arc involves learning the painful lesson that Jack is Untrustworthy. At the very end, she’s given the opportunity to take him back - and she doesn’t use it. There’s hints that she has her Kind, Trustworthy alternative waiting in the wings, but it’s not explicit. It ends on the happiest possible ending to a bad romance: getting over it.

I used to read the Binchy novels in a cycle, as pure comfort food. It’s been a long while since I’ve done that, because in the last three years especially I’ve pushed myself to read books I’ve never read before. (‘For the ‘gram!’ Lol, no, but I won’t deny that the Goodreads counter is powerful motivator.) I think this book is one of the first tier, along with ‘Circle of Friends’, ‘Tara Road’, and ‘Scarlet Feather’, but - like Anna’s storyline in ‘Silver Wedding’ - Sister Madeline’s storyline in ‘The Glass Lake’ is off-putting. I can’t put my finger on why, but I tended to skim over these parts in both books every time. Generally, there’s a wise woman character in every novel: someone with bags of life experience, who is able to sit still with other people’s problems, and help them work their own way to a solution. Sometimes they’re a major character, like Mother Francis, and sometimes they only have walk-on roles, like the psychic traveller woman in ‘Tara Road’. I enjoyed the subtle critique of fifties Irish theological thinking presented by Sister Madeline, but I wasn’t sure, then, why she needed to be vanquished. 

Another aspect I took little note of years ago was Kit and her proto-#metoo badassery. She looks at the situation - 'a woman’s reputation is all she has' - and weaponises it. It is stunning. 'Imputing unchastity to a woman', indeed. Nor did I get the sense that Binchy is pushing an agenda, at least any more than she usually is by writing about women with intense, varied interior lives. Sexual assault and rape are never cheap in Binchy; they're used sparingly, with careful intent, and I deeply respect that.

Oh. And she’s funny.

“ ‘They don’t unless they’re pregnant,’ Kit said with spirit.
‘We could get pregnant. That would be a great idea,’ Philip said.
‘Jesus!’ said the waitress. ‘I’ll come back when you’ve something less dramatic on your mind, like what you’re going to have for your supper.”’
 
“ ‘She looks great,’ Clio whispered. ‘That’s a terrific outfit.’
‘She probably stole it. Most of us did,’ Kit said loftily.”
 
“ ‘No, get two eggs, sherry, Worchester sauce, and a saucer to put on top of the glass.’
‘Why?’
‘So that it won’t all fall out when I shake it.’
‘No, I mean why should I do any of this for you?’
‘Because I think I may have saved your great romance for you. Hurry, Ivy. I might be about to die.’”
 
“ ‘Did Clio show you her watch?’
‘She did. I thought she might want Bobby Boylan to call for a roll of drums and have it carried around the room.”’

By contrast, Binchy can also be quietly moving. She’s never heavy-handed with the sentiment; like ginger, she uses it seldom, and to great effect.

“ ‘And didn’t I run away with you too?’
But it wasn’t an equal running away.
‘Of course you did,’ Lena said gently. ‘We ran like silver fish across the sea.’”
 
“Although it would be a sin against charity to go around repeating it, Mother Bernard was one of the very sizeable number who believed that Helen McMahon might well have ended her own life, and would therefore not be in a place where anyone might pray to her with any hope of an answer.”
 
“ ‘You’re going to be fine, Martin. I’ve seen Peter’s eyes, he means it. And I love you, I love you with all my heart. You make me sing with happiness.’
Emmet McMahon and Peter Kelly exchanged glances. They weren’t meant to hear such a declaration of love. It was very private and neither of the would ever refer to it again.”
 
I also love this description of Stevie.

“ [...] I think they’d like you too, you’re great fun.’
She tried to remember whether he was or not. He always seemed so jaded and cynical and eyeing people up and down. But he did have a kind of laughing way with him.”

 If I was reading this for the first time, while knowing what I do about Binchy’s authorial intentions, the fact that Stevie’s ‘laughing way’ and his ‘jaded cynicism’ are both obvious would mark him out as deviating from the Sexy, Untrustworthy man mould. Sexy, Untrustworthy man is always bright, sparkling, and positive - it’s part of his charm, and part of his lies. We stan Team Stevie.