Rating: 3/5

I enjoyed Like Water for Chocolate, her international best seller (1989) and the movie too. This was her follow-up book in 1996, which was "considered the first multimedia novel in Mexico." This a novel, a comic book and a CD to challenge the senses.

It comes with a CD with Puccini opera classics (Nessun Dorma, O Mio Bambino, to name a few) alternating with songs by Eugenia León and Liliana Felipe (Liliana has a fabulous voice). I love the opera and the funky Mexican tunes are wonderful. So how does this work? Throughout the book, the main character Azucena listens to her Walkman to chill out. Sadly I had to download it to listen on my phone. Well technology has changed even for this concept book. Still it was fun.

The comic book, illustrated by the Spaniard Miguelanxo Prado, is staggered throughout the novel to illustrate the key actions of the characters. All of the comic stories are set to the operatic arias. I was a little unsettled by the very graphic content set for the music but then, it follows the key elements of opera: love, cheating, betrayal renewal and/or death. This book has all of these plus a little comedy (that is also a genre of opera).

The novel itself is very unique - a blend of romance, science fiction, souls and reincarnation set in the year 2200. Azucena loves Rodrigo but starts to discover his past and the more she delves into into, the wilder it gets. She herself is an astroanalyst - she uncovers people's past lives to help better themselves. She is a lot neurotic but the humour through keeps the book moving along.

I was hooked by the startling initial story of the Spanish Conquistador Rodrigo whose child by Isabel is murdered by the Aztec princess Citlali. Suddenly we are in the year 2200 dealing with space travel, fixing souls, reincarnation and the whole lot and I was a little miffed. What on earth is going on here? Souls and reincarnation are not typically my thing but I did keep reading. Then I had a hard time putting the book down and the story as complicated was it was, had some great moments and reflections throughout..

Does it work? Sometimes it seemed a little hokey. Sometimes I was a little confused. Sometimes a lot weirdness happens (even for a book written 20 years ago). The comic and the CD elements work although are certainly dated. Her theme of revenge and payback, as old as they are, work. It was an enjoyable entertainment. So I would give it a 3.5.

Leí en español.