Rating: 2/5

Man why are tie-in novels always so so bad. Only giving this the extra star because the alien designs were cool. Lizard people, kangaroo people and insect people, plus the occasional Humanoid With One (1) Weird Facial Ridge. Too bad everything else was so lousy. Clumsy, stilted writing. No one sounded in character. Didn't spend nearly enough time with the bad guys and what happened to them, anyway? Multiple references to the worst Voyager episode of them all. Half of this was just a smashup of The Raven and the one where Seven starts being subsumed by all the assimilated people lurking in her brain? And it was a lot more interesting the first time.

Speaking of Seven, multiple times I doubled checked the author out of surprise this wasn't written by a man. Why is everyone always so weird about Seven! Especially coming off of ST Picard which gave us a complex, thoughtful, fully realized Seven (staunchly Not Annika! Dating ladies! Wearing five shirts!), it was grating to be stuck back in the 00s dichotomy of Seven (mean) Vs Annika (nice, bouncing blonde curls and flouncy dress, everyone likes her so much better than that mean ol Seven). 

Don't feel like I learned anything new about Seven despite her being the star of the book. And it annoyed me that drone!Seven was talking while assimilating. Individual drones don't talk. In this powerpoint on Borg society I will

OK, one thing I did like was that the only reason anyone survived the bad guys was due to the Borg having already figured out their weak spots. Everyone say "thank u Borg Collective."

Finally, of all the characters to make racist against bug people, even momentarily, how could you choose FORMER SCIENCE OFFICER Captain Janeway? Kidding? You can't tell me her first thought upon seeing a sentient human-sized water bug wouldn't be "neat!!!!!" Plus the Federation absolutely has bug people she probably studied under one at the Academy. Cmon now.

Those are the thoughts I had about this lousy tie-in novel.