Rating: 4/5

Undoubtedly, Sigmund Freud is a classic. Consequently, he shares the fate of any classic: everybody knows of and few read him anymore. After all, what is to discover we didn’t already learn? That he explained every evil or deviation in human behaviour by some repressed sexual urges generated mainly by the Oedipal complex. That he founded the science of psychoanalysis, but many of his theories and methods are obsolete today. That he influenced the Modernist movement, especially regarding some famous techniques such as introspection, psychological analysis, stream of consciousness, involuntary memory and so on. Things we've learnt in school, while studying more or less some excerpts of his books. 

But when you finally make up your mind and read it, you realize he is definitely worth it. That he is always relevant, and in no way a mere fossil frozen in time to remind of obsolete periods in our culture.

In this context, Civilization and Its Discontents is a revelation. Its main theme: civilization as a source of unhappiness for the individual, is not new (Rousseau’s good savage comes easily to mind, not to say that it is a problem debated since antiquity), but the development he chose to give it is seductive and pertinent. 

The premise is simple and difficult to argue with: 

…what decides the purpose of life is simply the programme of the pleasure principle.

This pursuit of happiness is prevented by at least three factors: our own body, the external world and our relations with the others. Therefore, whenever life becomes too hard to bear, man resorts to palliative measures: “powerful deflections, which cause us to make light of our misery; substitutive satisfactions, which diminish it; intoxicating substances, which make us insensitive to it.” An example of deflection could be the scientific activity. Art, with its refugee in the phantasy can act as a substitute. Drugs, alcohol etc. – as an anaesthetic. 

But why is man unhappy with himself and the world? Because, Freud says, man is basically an aggressive being whom civilization keeps in check through two “weapons”: Ananke and Eros, that is, “the compulsion to work, which was created by external necessity, and the power of love”. However, the love instinct (used by the society to keep its members together) is counteracted by the aggressive instinct. (I liked, even I wasn’t convinced of, the reference to the Oedipal complex as illustration for this problem: the aggressive instinct dictates the killing of the father, whereas the love instinct stops it). 

The struggle between Eros and Thanatos (with the continual repression of the death instinct dictated by society) leads to a sense of guilt which, although the most important problem in the development of civilization bringing with it the loss of happiness, usually remains in subconscious, being experienced rather as a sort of malaise, of anxiety. Moreover, the super-ego, which is the consciousness, penalizes the ego either with remorse or guilt, for sins committed or only thought of. 

The book ends with two presumptions: on one hand that beside an individual super-ego there could also be a “cultural super-ego”, thus viewing the society as a huge organism that developed its own consciousness, and on the other hand, that the battle between Eros and Thanatos is not only eternal but also unpredictable, thus throwing a pessimist shadow over the future. And he was unfortunately right. The World War II was just around the corner.