Rating: 5/5

I used to like reading Erma Bombeck so many years ago. She is now late. I found this book at a library sale. A stern faced picture of her is on her book. I read it and will be giving it to others to read. So many enjoyed Erma's laugh out loud sayings. So funny, so true.

This book is about her trips all around the world, some on vacation, some for work. Trips with people she worked with, trips with her teenagers, trips with her husband, trips with parents, trips with her whole family members. Some trips were fun, others she didn't know what to think of, foreign countries, foreign foods, foreign ways, not being able to understand or be understood. She thought they all spoke English. She learned differently.

Forty one ports of call, some longer than others in which she went into more detail, others short and sweet. She comments on her different much is, how Americans are so lucky.

In one warm country she wrote about buying a pretty dress to wear to church, then found women going topless. How Erma Bombeck.

The family bought a trailer or RV thinking of all they fun they would have driving all around the States and Canada. The Rv was too tiny for a family of five. One best day was when they bought the trail, the other was when they sold it.

Erma Bombeck loves to shop, everywhere she went, she shopped. Mr Bombeck got very tired, decided to take a long nap. Mrs Bombeck NO. Sleep when there were stores that needed customers and te be explored. Sleep was a waste of time.

Mrs. Bombeck writes about going to Africa on a trip with a group of photographers, eyes glued to cameras, taking notes, carrying film, lenses,light meters, instead of watching the world around them. She went to old, long established countries, went through so many old churches, castles, saw many antiques. Artifacts had to be ancient to satisfy lovers of antiquity. She has seen so much, done so much, enjoyed life, and made people laugh. She has her own way of looking at life. I liked reading about her several trips to Russia.