Rating: 3/5

The tales told here remind me of Mother Goose type of little rhymes, used to teach children to behave or who knows what awful fate they may meet. Some of these have mild punishments for misbehaving, while others are down right horrific. It is likely that these short verses worked well at keeping children out of too much trouble when they were written in 1845, while children may not have truly believed the outcomes they probably didn't want to step out of line either. Children today, overall, are so desensitized and at early ages that most probably wouldn't have nightmares after hearing these, especially if read in that sing songy way one reads rhymes. That being said, if you have a sensitive child, you may want to skip a few of these, I know at a young age my daughter would have not enjoyed a few of these, and honestly even now as a teen she would probably say, really, why, she prefers happy things, well most of us do.

I would give this edition an additional star because it would be a wonderful resource for someone that is learning, our wanting to brush up on, their German or Latin. Each rhyme is presented in all the languages, the third being English. Originally written in German they have become a favorite to be translated into Latin because the easily transform into the medieval poetry pattern. Enough and Latin see only the top of the iceberg as far as translations go, these have been translated into over 100 different languages/dialects. This edition also includes a section at the end where the works have been modernized a bit and presented in English only. These modernizations kept with the original, but mostly looked at changing a few words here and there to use terminology that would make more sense to today's children. Of course, as with any good children's book, colorful pictures can be found accompanying the tales as well.

I also placed a hold on Struwwelpeter: Humor or Horror?: 160 Years Later to see what "they" have to say about Heinrich Hoffman's work. It is ready for me to pick up, so should be able to post review on it in a few days as well.