Rule of the Bone by Russell Banks is a story about a young boy named Chappie. Chappie lives with his mom and step dad in a small town in upstate New York in the Lake Placid area. Chappie, just 13 at the time grows a fondness for marijuana and hangs out with a tough crowd that is all very much older than him. As time goes on Chappie becomes more and more addicted to weed and alcohol. This addiction eventually leads him to stealing from his mother to buy drugs and he gets kicked out of the house because of it. This is where his journey really begins. He takes off with a friend of his named Russ and they begin their lives on the road as homeless teenagers. With no car, no shelter and little to no money the boys spend their money on food and drugs. Through a strange turn of events Chappie gets the nick name Bone and from that point on is always referred to as that. Bone and Russ eventually go their separate ways, they were best friends for a long time but the isolation they shared for so long while they were on the run eventually drove them to dislike and then to hate each other. Bone does not take this easy and feels like his best friend deserted him after contributing to getting him in the difficult situation. After Bone recovers from the loss he regroups and decides that nothing can be accomplished by just hoping things will get better. With this new proactive attitude Bone retraces his steps. After being turned away by his mother and again having nowhere to go Bone crashes in a bus with a Rastafarian man who called himself “I-man”. He preached finding “I-self” which is like finding what is really important to you. Following I-Man’s lead Bone then goes on a very strange and exciting journey that you definitely will not see coming. 
Personally I liked this book for a few reasons. Rule of the Bone had a lot of things that the rest of the books I read this semester did not. In the book the main character was a younger boy who was a drug user. I thought that this was a nice change because at the very least I haven’t read too many books where the main character is a 13 year old druggy; it adds a different element to the story. Something I really liked also was that the book took place in the Adirondacks about 2 hours north of here. Having been in the area that the book describes made it really easy to imagine what was going or at least where the events were taking place. The other big thing that I liked was that the book was very unpredictable. The story will look like its going one way and all the sudden it’s going in a direction that you couldn’t imagine. The unpredictability of the book keeps you on your toes and definitely keeps you interested. These are a few reasons that I can think of why I liked the book and if any of that sounds interesting to you I would highly recommend this book for you.