Rating: 3/5

Book Review 
The Rabbi 
Noah Gordon
3/5 stars
"Meandering. Some information, but generally low value-added" 

Every once in a while, it's a good idea to read a palate-cleansing book like this one after reading other books that are too heavy or depressing. 

My aim in reading this was to try to get some information about three phenomenon that I myself have noticed: 

1. Orthodox Jews have been having huge families for many decades, and yet they stay a minor fraction of all Jewry. 

Whither the leakage? 

2. I don't know anything about Reform Judaism. (And, I will not likely be learning about it since more than one Orthodox Rabbi has told me to not even go into any building where they hold services.) Was it different just a half century ago to what it is today? 

3. Can I draw parallels between the Jewish Community as I see them today and an American Jewish Community half century ago?
******* 

Sometimes you know that certain historical events have happened but it takes a little bit more dramatization/narrative arc in order for them to seem more real. 

The technique of reverse engineering characters to build a narrative arc around factual historical events has been mastered byJames Michener (long, multi-generational sagas). 

Gordon's attempt to do the same thing takes place over a much shorter span of time and only three generations. 

In many ways, the book is all over the place. 

It describes: 

-A clergyman at a Reform synagogue who is waiting for 10 men (!) for a minyan for daily (!) prayers? (Can I deduce that the counting of women was something that would not have been done a half century ago? How far back do we have to go into the history of reform to see when they did have three daily minyonim?) 

-A Reform "Talmudist"? 

-A Rabbi with children in public school who participated in a Christmas play? 

-A Rabbi who entered into a church for his father-in-law's funeral service? And had enough familiarity to suspect that they were reading from I Corinthians? 
******* 

There was a bit too much sturm und drang about young people engaging in sexual relationships. (Michener's good historical fiction shows that people have been doing "it" for a long time without much thought all over the world.) 

What are the things that were brought to life from this book? 

1. Way back when, conversion was a much simpler thing: 3 months of study under an Orthodox rabbi and the mikvah visit was scheduled. (Compare this to the 3 years that we spent working on our Orthodox conversion.) 

The conversion characterized here also appeared to be interdenominational: An Orthodox Rabbi converting a woman who would marry a Reform Rabbi. (The Converting Rabbi was also unaware that the woman planned to get married.) 

2. Even way back around the time a couple of years after WWII, the problem was the same: it's a piece of cake to build an expensive new Temple, but the problem is to actually get people to put into it. (p.281: "Just realize that you've got enemies, Rabbi. Rows of empty seats.") 

3. Jews From Somewhere (Eastern Europe in this case) give birth to more Americanized Jews that progressively slacken in ritual observance. 

4. As observance slackens, Judaism becomes more about race and less of a religion. (Orthodox Jews are mostly unwilling to entertain the racial aspects of the Jewish people because that would mean that they would have to accept reform and conservative as Jews of lower observance. Reform Jews did not have the shield of punctilious observance, and so being Jewish must be about appearance/genetics/race.) 

Even though the wife of the protagonist (a Reform Rabbi) was as Sparkling White as everyone else, the fact that she was not racially Jewish came up over and over again in the book--at least frequently enough for us to know that Gordon was trying to tell us something. 

5. Observance is a continuum and not really a very consistent one even with respect to one individual over time: People may slip on and off of observance many times during a single life. (One character here never keeps kosher or goes to services, and yet he feels the need to shroud the mirrors during shiva. A character is non-practicing all of his life but his second wife is much more Orthodox.) 

6. The future is the past: the great majority of Jewish people are happy to go to services once or twice a year when they need to be Jewish--otherwise, it's not a significant part of their lives. 

Then as now: those semi annual types greatly outnumber the people who daven three times a day by a factor of 8. 

7. Rabbis are (in the apt words of Shalom Aualander--author of "The Foreskin's Lament") "beggars, quibblers, and handshakers." 

"Hand shakers" is a fairly cynical descriptor that could charitably be called political strategists: A Rabbi trying to find the political position to take on any given topic such that he offends the fewest number of members/gets his contract renewed is a tiger searching to find the size of his cage. 

Then, as now. 

8. (p.308) So many rabbis dream to "sit with hordes of people at his feet and listen to his brilliant 20th century interpretations of Talmudic wisdom." 

And yet almost all settle for grunt work. (Leining, fundraising, trying to assemble smaller than hoped-for classes. Trying to keep a minyan together.) 

*******
I did go into this book trying to get some number of shapeless questions answered that I've had for a number of years after my own conversion: 

1. Q: "Why are (Haredi) Orthodox people so *mean*?" 

A: If I believe what was written in this book, I would get the idea that the general unfriendliness / coldness was a reaction to being surrounded by hostile neighbors that could break out into a pogrom at any second. 

2. Q: "Why do they speak in such an unclear/misleading way?" 

A: It might be from times in the past where offering information to directly could lead to getting your throat slashed or your farm burned down. I can deduce that, but that's not something that the author directly showed us by way of his characters. 

******* 

I do wonder' who was the audience of the book? 

I'm not certain that it was for gentiles, in spite of how many copies it sold. He had a ton of words that only an "insider" would know. And this was written decades the before Google search. 

The whole book can be read through in about 
5 and 1/2 to 6 hours. 

Verdict: Not recommended. 

Acquired vocabulary: 

Chert
Peau de soie
Dottle
Seersucker
Borax (furniture)
Carillon
Campanologist
Kishke=stuffed derma
Guano
Guck
Nosegay
Plunging back
Bubbling (the baby)
Lochinvar
Chagall (artist)
Dower rights
Saltonstall Jaw (not really a word; Gordon's attempt at neologism)
Stubby Kaye
tayglech