Rating: 3/5

In The General in His Labyrinth, Márquez takes the glorious figure of Simón Bolívar—the man who led the South American peoples in the present states of Venezuela, Colombia, Peru, Ecuador, Panama, and Bolivia to their freedom from the Spanish Empire—and pours into the mould of his political imprint on the continent an endlessly humanising tribute. Reimagining the least documented period of Bolívar's life, Márquez situates the liberator to reckon with his mortality and failures on his final journey down the river Magdalena.

Whereas the author's densely atmospheric and descriptive style (the beauty of which Michael Bell once described with the phrase "psychological suppleness") lends the prose in this book moments of magical clarity, this is in fact a decidedly unmagical tale. Bolívar here is a man swirling about the last dregs of hope: having renounced power he is set to leave the continent forever, held back at the same time by a reluctance to let go—of power, of his dream of a united South American republic, one he would never fulfil, and; at last; of life. 

In fact, Márquez urges one to read the General's body; so ravaged by tuberculosis that most people doubt he will survive to his exile in Europe; as intimately connected with this imagined nation. The spectre of mortality which looms large over every detail in this fictionalised account thus points not only at Bolívar's impending death, but also at the country he fought for disintegrating before his eyes. This connection sees its clearest example in the manner in which the perfidies of his enemies are described and catalogued, as if it is these betrayals, and not the disease, that torment him to his death.  
  Sketch of Simón Bolívar at age 47, made from life (and nearing his death) by José María Espinosa, 1830    The writer undertook copious research for two years in order to fill out the characters in his fictionalisation, which is evident in the detail and veracity with which he describes the complex and often contradictory figure that the General was, including his ways with women, his often contradictory nationalist ideals, and his relationship with his slave and closest personal aide, José Palacios. Though the Bolívar that Márquez sketches out for us is frail and dying, he nevertheless exudes a dignified charm, and the memories of his youthful conquests weave in and out of the narrative like threads snagging in time. 

All that being said, I did find myself struggling with this book often and took an inordinately long time (ten days!) to finish it; not-entirely-pleasant experiences I attribute largely to my lack of familiarity with the history of Latin America. For fans of Márquez who are similarly under-educated on these topics, this may prove to be a magical read in the same way as 
  Chronicle of a Death Foretold
—The General in His Labyrinth has all of the author's humour and narrative charms with hardly a smidgen of the magic realism that is his hallmark. 

While it will go down as the least impressive Márquez I've read so far, it is still an astounding book. I particularly enjoyed the last chapter and the raw lucidity with which it articulates the tension at the heart of this biographical fiction, using the General's own last words:   He was shaken by the overwhelming revelation that the headlong race between his misfortunes and his dreams was at that moment reaching the finish line. The rest was darkness.

'Damn it,' he sighed. 

'How will I ever get out of this labyrinth?’