Rating: 2/5

Credit to R.L. Stine for mixing it up in Goosebumps book five, The Curse of the Mummy's Tomb. It resists established patterns for the series, leaning on evocative settings to propel the story. Twelve-year-old Gabe Sabry is on an adventure over Christmas vacation from school. He and his parents are at the Great Pyramid in Egypt, where a discovery by Gabe's uncle, Ben Hassad, could revolutionize Egyptology. A network of hidden tunnels in the pyramid has been found that could lead to the tomb of Pharaoh Khufu himself. When Gabe's parents have to travel to Alexandria for a few days, Gabe is excited to accompany Ben to the Great Pyramid every day. Is he about to witness history?

 Gabe is less thrilled that his cousin Sari, two months older than he, is visiting her dad from the United States. Sari's superior attitude drives Gabe up a wall, and she inherited Uncle Ben's teasing sense of humor. On their first trip into the pyramid Ben warns Gabe and Sari to stick close; it's easy to get lost in the labyrinth of tunnels. Gabe is chilled at the prospect of seeing a real mummy, but Sari says they've found only one mummy case, an empty one. Ben informs Gabe that this new dig isn't without opposition; some on his archaeology team, including a sullen young man named Ahmed, are adamant that poking around in Ancient Egyptian tombs is sacrilege. Ben argues there's much to be gained by exploring the culture of the ancients, and he won't back down.

 With his "mummy hand" in his pocket—a toy Gabe picked up at an American garage sale and considers a good luck charm—Gabe manages not to get permanently lost inside the pyramid with Sari. He has less luck in urban Cairo; Gabe and his cousin get pulled into a weird game by Ahmed. Does he resent them because Ben is investigating the Great Pyramid? Gabe and Sari elude what appears to be a kidnapping attempt by Ahmed, but he barely knows the kids; would he hurt them? When Gabe and Sari return to the pyramid and end up lost in its tunnels, they discover a chamber no archaeologist has seen for perhaps thousands of years, a sanctuary that could rewrite the book on Egyptology. Something dark and suspicious is happening in this room; are they in mortal danger from a secret as old as Khufu?

 The Curse of the Mummy's Tomb is among the less successful early Goosebumps books for one main reason: it doesn't fit the horror genre. It's primarily an adventure, driven by action scenes in Cairo and inside the Great Pyramid. The climax veers close to being corny. The final chapter is kind of nice, though. I won't put The Curse of the Mummy's Tomb near the level of Say Cheese and Die!, but it's a serviceable story.