Rating: 3/5

The Solo family on Coruscant is almost like something out of Keeping Up with the Kardashians.

While Jacen continues to practice his one liners before a test audience, this book relies far too much on previous source material.

"Stay on target," "Don't get cocky kids," "scruffy-looking," tauntauns, banthas, even Em Teedee has a moment with Threepio! (Thank the maker?) Em Teedee is fluent in over six forms of communication, whereas Threepio is fluent in over six MILLION forms of communication.

"Lowie ate steaming pieces of heated (but still raw) read meat." I don't think Porgs were anywhere close to being canon at this point.

Old stormtrooper rations are also mentioned. "They don't taste like much, but they have all of our nutritional requirements." Are these the same type of rations traded on Jakku?

The twins' friend Zekk is an independent Indiana Jones type who has freedoms Jacen and Jaina don't have. He feels underappreciated and decides to join the Shadow Academy after a strong pitch from Brakiss and is rewarded with new clothes and a good night's sleep. Gang members from The Lost Ones, abandoned kid scavengers on Coruscant who live underground, also factor into this tale's equation. Their gang symbol is an equilateral triangle surrounding a cross.

Hyperdrive cores and turbo laser batteries have great value and are being stolen by the "bad guys" from "the good guys."

Brakiss continues to make some rather sound arguments:

"Your friends have told you to hate the Empire, but you never witnessed any of it firsthand. You realize, of course, that whichever government is in charge always makes the defeated enemy look like a monster. I will tell you the truth. The Empire had very little political chaos. Every person had opportunities. There were no gangs running wild through the streets of Coruscant. Everyone had a task to do, and they did it willingly."

"As I told you, the Force moves as strongly within the less-fortunate as those who are rich and powerful."

"I wouldn't want you to do it for me. Or for a government or institution you know little about. I'm asking you to do this for yourself. Haven't you always wanted to develop your skills, your talents?"

Somehow Emperor Palatine is still alive??? It was a big deal his clothes were destroyed six years after the destruction of the second Death Star. The Emperor needs new clothes...

Tenel Ka says, "This is a fact." far too frequently for it to be charming. 

On a plus note, Admiral Ackbar is still alive!