Rating: 4/5

That is not dead which can eternal lie,
And with strange aeons death may die.

Is HPL the most paradoxical author to read in recent times? 

Probably not. There's arguably countless waiting in the shadows, ready to lay claim to that title. But it's a given fact that reading Howard is never easy. Be it owing to the nature of his personality, his set of beliefs, or simply his utter inability to write well. It's pretty common to find yourself stranded within the foggy confines of his 'eldritch' world. And yet, we read him to this very day. And will probably continue to do so until the end of time. 

Such has been his impact upon the musty underbelly of weird fiction and greater cosmic horror. Not the first ever to do so. But a revolutionary nonetheless whose influence still pulsates throughout pop culture and the unforgiving pits of nerd haven. So much so that reading him through a starkly modern lens might come off as repetitive. A sense of deja vu engulfing your nodal points as you meet the maker after wrestling down knock-offs all your life!

Nevertheless, despite everything, I've been an ardent Lovecraft fan since my school days. I have owned this particular edition for around eight years now. And do remember reading a few of the stories from within. However, my memory was threatening to betray me. And there rose an urge inside to revisit 'The Dunwich Horror' again. Something that I originally read only in translation and was keen to test again, against Howard's muddy prose.

As such, if you pick this one up and look past the 3D cover (glasses included!) As well as the lack of annotations and introductory material, you'll find yourself with twelve of his tales, all connected through the (filmsy) thread of the Cthulhu Mythos. Do not take offence with my choice of words, however, for Lovecraft's world-building, including the ever-modern notion of a shared universe, was mostly in jest. A clever little device that the man tinkered with but never really enforced upon his readers. 
 
Creating a sense of inclusivity not only for his audience but also for his later admirers, who'd go on to build upon and expand the plethora of unspooled loose ends. Lovecraft himself borrowed judiciously from his peers and predecessors. And in a way, he created a benchmark for being borrowed likewise. Sure, he was historically stuck up about his work, often threatening to quit it altogether in the face of poor reception. But then, such was typical of him and his cranky, haughty headspace that oozed brilliance aplenty.

Although it misses the timely quips of Lovecraft researcher S.T. Joshi, this edition gleefully starts off with one of HPL's most grotesque short stories, 'The Rats in the Walls'. Something that I'd read back in school but completely forgotten over time. And boy was I in for a renewed sense of surprise, alongside the gut-churning stench of pathos, so typical of his reveals. Surprisingly Gothic, it utilises the tested 'creature behind the partition' trope and magnifies it with a demented slither of degradation.
 
This is then immediately followed by another one of my shorter favourites. ''The Picture in the House'. This is Lovecraft playing completely into the macabre. Flexing his creepy muscles, despite little Cthulhu connections beyond a 'Necronomicon' namedrop. All culminating with an utterly memorable final stretch that left me jittery with a case of the late-night dread!

The following two stories are also short but are not my absolute favourites, despite the cosmic inquisitiveness shown abundantly in 'The Nameless City' of Arabia. And the murky cult of horrors hinted towards in 'The Festival'. They aren't Lovecraft's best work and leave a lot to be desired. But at the same time, they help one acclimatise oneself before the eventual arrival of the bigger fishes. It's a rite of passage, almost. The mandatory endurance of wordy circulation before you're presented with the real heavyweights. 
 
The likes of 'The Call of the Cthulhu' and 'The Dunwich Horror'. 
 
It's actually quite funny, now that I think of it. All these years of being a fan, and I'd never once read 'The Call...' itself. And my first ever experience was not entirely positive as well. Despite being introduced to the 'figurative' granddad of a very popular universe, I found the didactic style of storytelling really taxing. Something that worked relatively well for his other longer texts, but just felt a bit banal here on. The finale and its marine 'madness' were also anti-climactic (get used to it!) and just didn't tempt me the way I'd hoped it would. Making this one an actual miss in my book.
 
"Do better, Howard!" I might have screamed, yelled, and shouted towards the pages in vain, but thankfully, 'The Dunwich Horror' showed up immediately to pacify it all. A deeply atmospheric, well-written tale that balances the allure of cosmic trickery with that of the despicable. Lovecraft commands the tension surprisingly well and crawls towards a solid finale. One that's greatly embellished with an extremely chilling final sentence that made me put the book away and compose myself for a good minute.
 
Some might take offence to HPL's tendency to greatly oversell his reveals with exclamations and italics. But it mostly works out for me, despite the shoddy literary value, or lack thereof. You can find something similar in 'The Whisperer in Darkness', as well. 

A much longer story, the longest yet of the book, which I personally felt could have benefitted from a crisper edit. And yet, I was never bored for a minute traversing it's varied length. Lovecraft descends into proper science fiction right here, introducing the Mi-Go creatures as well as strengthening his brand of interstellar doom. As usual, the final stretch is tense, lively and memorable. It shakes you greatly and makes you forgive the author for the obvious plotholes and his inability to remain concise (for the love of all things holy!).

This brings me to a story that I really wanted to love. 'The Dreams in the Witch House'. A fairly straightforward tale of a mathematical research student inclined towards the occult, taking residence in the eponymous witch house, and the dreams that he's plagued with almost instantaneously. For his part, Lovecraft had ambition writing this thing. He invoked the spirit of science and witchcraft with a vivid sense of grotesqueness while playing up the surrealism tenfold.
 
However, it's not an easy read. Especially when Howard goes overboard with all the technical jargon in the game. Which is a shame, for this one is generally a more well-loved story. Recently filmed under Guillermo Del Toro's tutelage as well. But I couldn't enjoy it as much as I'd have loved to. A personal bummer, despite that deliciously wretched culmination. Maybe watching it unfold on the screens would be a better fit? Fingers crossed.

Anyways. We move on to another one of my absolute favourites. 'The Shadow over Innsmouth'. There's a distinct sense of wonder in the way Lovecraft helps you visualise the shady coastal town of Innsmouth. Almost overdoing it in his exhaustive approach with the details. But making it all worthwhile with the slow-burning buildup of dread, which in turn pulsates within the core of its ever-rotten mythology. 
 
It's curious how HPL himself was not fond of this piece. Judging it harshly in his later days. But to me, this might be one of the best examples of Lovecraft, the author, and his ability to balance action with that of the informative. There's this riveting chase sequence by the end of 'Innsmouth' that's arguably one of the best pieces of moving action ever written by the author. But his acute underconfidence meant that, more than ever, we'd find him resorting to the tested shelter of the didactic and nothing else. 
 
'The Shadow over Innsmouth' also sees Lovecraft exploring his preferred themes of sin persevering through bloodlines, intermixing of races, and hereditary mania. Elements of which can be visible throughout the book. A breed of paranoia that's widely believed to have been born out of Lovecraft undergoing sudden poverty as a child, health issues persisting in his family, and his infamous sense of racial superiority.

Nevertheless, we dredge on and reach the mountain itself. A literal mountain of a text, the extremely long, extremely potent, and infuriatingly wasteful 'At the Mountains of Madness'.
 
This angered me in real time. Feeling interminable at point with it's dry prose, purple paragraphs, and exhaustive amount of technical details. (Take 'Witch House' and multiply it with a hundred.) I do understand what HPL was attempting here. He was notoriously famous for scientific accuracy. And even edited information out in later prints, owing to them being out of date since the time of completion. But the goodwill itself doesn't make it a palatable read, does it? 
 
It almost hinders the story rather. More so in this one, which is undoubtedly the most mythology-heavy tale in the entire book. Providing a surprising amount of answers and context to questions you'd probably wondered throughout and googled on with varied levels of success. It is this allure and intrigue of such vivid, tempting lore that kept me afloat and helped me brave the awful writing. In modern times, we might call this the classic case of a good concept, bad execution.
 
However, such cannot be said about the next in line, 'The Haunter of the Dark'. Nothing in it actively tickled my imagination, and it lost me pretty soon amidst the muck of purple prosing. It's an important story, however. Being the last one Lovecraft ever penned. Making people usually more kinder to this tale. And there's a genuine feeling in the circles about how Lovecraft's 'writing had improved a lot' by this point. But unfortunately, I didn't find any of that for myself. 

It does warrant a later re-read, for sure. But for now, this takes the designation of being my least favourite story in the whole book.

And there we have it. We've arrived at our final station. 'The Thing on the Doorstep'. A much simpler tale that almost evokes the spirit of 'The Dunwich Horror' in its approach. It's nothing revolutionary per se and was generally looked down upon unfavourably by critics back then. But as we can sense a pattern here, I loved this one a lot. If nothing, despite it's predicatable nature, the story starts off with one of the most unhinged openers ever written by HPL. ("It is true that I have sent six bullets through the head of my best friend, and yet I hope to show by this statement that I am not his murderer.") And ends with a devilish image of degradation that rivals his very best. Can't recommend it enough!

(3.75/5 || October-November, 2024)