Rating: 4/5

Dead men don't walk.

Neither do dead women, but that doesn't mean their corpses always stay where you put them. There can be reasons why it's inconvenient for a corpse to be identified and P.I. William Crane runs into all of them in this complicated story of Chicago during the Great Depression.

Crane works for a New York City agency, but he happens to be in Chicago when he gets a telegram from his boss telling him to ascertain the identity of a dead woman who's currently residing in the Cook County Morgue. "Alice Ross" was found in a cheap hotel hanging from the bathroom door. It's an unconvincing suicide, but the cops and the county coronor are satisfied. 

Who cares about a blonde deader in a fleabag hotel with only $4 in her purse? As it turns out, several people are interested and some of them are willing to go to great lengths to find out who Alice Ross really was. When her body disappears from the morgue, all hell breaks loose. And Bill Crane is where he usually is, right in the cross hairs. 

The dead woman COULD be the wife of a Chicago gangster (Italian) who deserted her husband for another Chicago gangster (same flavor, but even more violent) and has now left him behind, too. She was once a luscious nightclub singer although she's got a few miles on her now. So are her husband and former lover anxious to be reunited with the love of their lives or do they want revenge?

The hard boys are generous with their broads, but they expect complete loyalty. The songbird either overestimates the power of love or she likes playing with fire. Whatever, both her husband and her former BF are convinced that Crane stole her corpse and they're willing to resort to torture or murder to find out what he did with it. 

He'd like to find her, too, since his agency has been hired by a rich socialite's family to find their wandering daughter, niece, and sister. Kathryn Courtland is less interested in her share of a $13 million dollar estate than in a cool musician who plays hot jazz. Her brother is worried about her and her mother and uncle are worried about the sacred family name featuring in large, nasty newspaper headlines.

Fortunately, the agency head has sent Bill Crane's colleague Doc Williams out to help him. Doc is a rough diamond, but he knows Chicago from his rum-running days, which comes in handy. The boss either anticipates trouble or wants to spend some of the rich uncle's money because he also sends Tom O'Malley. Six foot, three inches tall and 210 lbs of muscle, O'Malley is a good man to have around when you're caught between warring mobsters.

Chauncey Courtland, Jr is the classic rich kid, but he's spent some time in low dives himself and picked up a few tricks. Slumming is acceptable for a son sowing his oats before he settles down, but not for a daughter at any time. Courtland seems worried about his sister and he can hold his own, but is he on the side of the angels?

No fear of me giving away the plot because I got lost about halfway through the book. Detective novels are called "fast-paced" but this one proceeds at a dead run, with pit stops at bars, but no time out for naps. As O'Malley observes wryly, the three 'tecs get in a near-riot at a taxi-dance joint, stumble onto a murdered man, sit in with a bunch of doped-up musicians, crash a lively penthouse party, kidnap a woman, and rob a graveyard. If they could find the missing heiress they could get some sleep.

The end is as complicated as the rest of the story. Everyone involved has broken laws and not just running red lights or spitting on the sidewalk, either. Yet some are busted and some are patted on the back by smiling cops and D.A.'s. One law for the rich and another one for the rest of us? What else is new.

It's sometimes hard to follow, but the dialogue is always entertaining and frequently hilarious. As the guy who wrote the introduction says, the Great Depression created a national sense of " Screw it all! What the hell?" The rich got richer and the working class starved, so what did anyone have to lose? Not much, really, which is why "screwball" capers like Latimer's books and movies were so popular. 

Just relax and enjoy. And if you're looking for personal anguish and profound psychological in-sights, stick to modern books where the cop-hero is more screwed up than any of the criminals. Latimer wrote for fun. God bless him.