Rating: 5/5

A Return to Christmas by Chris Heimerdinger, Year 1996, Pages 141.

I think this book could be for anyone who is looking for a little christmas spirit and magic. The main problem I think is when the Holidays Andrew dies on Christmas day. The setting of this book is in parts of Utah mainly Sugar House and Las Vegas. The setting could be changed but you would still need the same time of the year and weather conditions I think. The Main character are the two twin boys Artemus and Andrew Holiday. In the biginning of the book the twins are both 3 years old at the supposive death of Andrew but most of the book takes place when they are 11.

The two twin Boys, Artemus and Andrew Holiday grew up having fun until the age of 3 when on christmas day Andrew fell in the river and drowned. From then on the Christmas season was never the same for the Holidays. It was around the Christmas season when Artemous was at the mall shopping when he ran into someone that looked like himelf. Andrew needed clothes so he stole artemuses and ran out with the clothes to the parking lot when the collision happend and that is when the boys found themelves in very unfamiliar worlds. Through this the boys have switched worlds and do not know who and what is going on around them. Chess Folum (Andrew in the book thought he has always been with his uncle boon. While Andrew is enjoying the new life with his family he has no clue about Artemus is trying to find his way back home. During this time they find out how much they love family. In the end Artemus and Andrew Holiday are reunited and the family that thought they lost there son has been alive all along.

I liked the book. It had a good story line that kept me involved and a good climax. I loved the tension it brought at the end of the story and all the times in between. The quotes I liked from the book that showed a little taste of what the tesion was like are from page 61 where it says,"with a grip tight enough to squeeze of the curculation boon led artemus to the door" the other one is from page 118 where it says,"This is the Holiday residence no one can come to the phone right now. If you wouldnt mind terribly, please leave a message and we'll call you right back." I Think the theme for this book is recognize the love and help your family gives you just in times when you have hard and confusing times. This book could really be for anyone really who wants a good read with a good ending for the christmas holiday. The outcomes, climax, and the ending in this book were all huge surprises. It was an exciting book with a good ending.