Rating: 4/5

Recommendation: Read this in one sitting. It's a very quick read with a pacing and construction very much of its own, best experienced without any long breaks. I had the misfortune of taking a break just before a certain, uuhm, "highlight", I guess you could call it, hurting the immersion a bit.

What is this book about? Fear. Mostly fear, and how people respond to it. There is a big amount of atmosphere setting as well, which is done brilliantly through the vivid descriptions of Tokyo's red-light districts and its dwellers, as well as through poignant remarks on society, American and Japanese alike. The author uses this thriller not only to strike fear into readers' hearts, but to make them think on societal values and habits, such as our different ways of communication, the obsession with consumption and image-building, the great escape from Loneliness Prison where the only tool some people seem to get is the social equivalent of a plastic spoon.

Japan, and Tokyo in particular, has always been an inspiring setting to me, ever since seeing the movie "Lost in Translation" and visiting the country myself. There's a beautiful melancholy surrounding it all, a dreaminess with a dystopian touch, and this book further confirmed and built on those feelings for Tokyo that reside within me. I don't claim to "know" Tokyo and I don't wish to pretend these feelings are in some way an opinion I can validate with strong facts, but the feelings are definitely there, and very strong. 

I recently came across a series of pictures that perfectly show the setting that has been painted by Ryu Murakami in words. Of course, everyone is entitled to visualizing it in their own way, but for the curious: check out the spoiler below.

 
More pictures, taken by Masashi Wakui, can be found here: Tokyo's greasy underbelly

The book is divided into the "before", the "Event" and the "after", more or less, so I'll organise this review accordingly. I try to avoid spoilers but if you want to make really sure it might be best to not read my thoughts on the "after". 

Before

The "before" is the best part of the story for me. The tension building is extremely well done, and you feel as if you're in Tokyo from page one. Kenji, a sex tourist guide, offers the main perspective in this book. The writing is done so well it's sometimes difficult not to feel like the sex tourist making use of his guidance. Just to say that this is a very immersive narrative. I learned a lot about how things are done under Tokyo's Neon Lights, and I have to say it's interesting and captivating to say the least. A whole new world opened up to me, and even though I'm glad to close that door again, it's been an illuminating experience.

The atmosphere surrounding Frank, the American tourist who has hired Kenji, is supremely well done. Is he dangerous? Or is Kenji jumping to conclusions and overreacting? The line between those two feelings is very delicately made and I found myself crossing it in either direction plenty of times. Frank throws lines of lies, seemingly daring you to catch one, and God knows what he'll reel you into once you do. Maybe a warm, loving hug? But maybe not.

Dangerous or not, Frank IS scary. And he's the kind of scary that hits home, because I'm certain that I have met people like the Frank described here. There was actually a particular person I could clearly picture when reading about Frank, making the immersion all the more intense, also because Kenji's reactions to him completely coincided with how mine would be. 

A sidenote: The "before" starts off with some politically incorrect statements, on homosexuals and Americans in particular. While I don't agree with these statements and don't even find them very funny, I'm not one to use "political correctness" as a yardstick for judging books. I hate the concept too much for that. Anyway, I don't want to make this review the source of the kind of discussions you find all over the Internet already. I just mentioned them because I think they've been thrown in there, early in the book, to dissuade the faint of heart. 

Because let met tell you, THIS BOOK IS NOT FOR THE FAINT OF HEART!

On to...

The Event

No comment here, apart from the fact that the capitalized "E" in Event is supposed to be there. It's quite something. Make sure you're not eating at the time, especially not miso soup or anything fluid and hot and with bits floating in them. It's shockingly colourful. 

After

That's where the book lost one star for me, but it's still very good. It just got harder for me to relate to one of the main characters. He's in a state of shock, obviously, and that feeling of loss of where his head is at is very elegantly described, but the rupture between the character's mind and actions made it harder for me to feel related to him on both counts. Here I have to come back to the recommendation I started this review with: Read it in one go. Maybe I wasn't shocked enough as a reader after reading the Event because I kind of jumped right into it instead of staying in the flow the build-up created so well. This made this last part more difficult to be affected by. I think. I don't know. But something went wrong there.

Aside from that, this story is well rounded-off. There's insights into the why's of the Event, but with the "buts" as well. Questions of manipulation and intimidation remain present, and while the character who felt lost seems to have found his way again, you don't get the feeling his story of coping is really over. Neither whether his story of running away in fear is. The blank pages at the end seem to indicate that as well. This story is far from over and continues to live on in the reader's head.

In the end, the thought that struck me was: a swan has more than one feather. 

In order to get that reference you'll have to read the book, something I can recommend to you as long as you're not the type that's sensitive to explicit violence. This book definitely has way more to offer than that violence, but malignity is an integral part of the story, which is something you probably need to be aware of before reading this very entertaining novel.