Rating: 4/5

Coin Locker Babies is one of most surreal books I've ever read. An angry, postmodern existentialist tale told with such detailed descriptive power, Ryū Murakami has crafted an utterly compelling novel about two adopted brothers, both abandoned in coin lockers, and their mentally and physically destructive upbringing into young adults. Hashi becomes a famous bisexual singer with an ever growing need to stab his pregnant wife and Kiku becomes a physically intimidating pole vaulter who, with his model girlfriend Anemone, wants to destroy Tokyo with an illegal chemical called DATURA. Sound weird? The funny this is: This synopsis is not even really the story. Those things are in the novel, but the novel is more about the destructive, terrifying lives of the brothers and their alienation from life and themselves. Right from the first page to the viscerally surreal final chapter, we are thrown into a socio-psychological analysis of the modern day Japanese soul, where everything is inverted, satirised and nonetheless intriguing. Throughout this, we get treated to savagely dark humour, social commentary, philosophical rambling and, unexpectedly, a very touching story.

  "The streets, crowded during the summer holidays, smelled of melting rubber in the heat, making Hashi feel as if heavy, glutinous strings were stretching out behind his feet- as if everyone he passed in this canyon of glass and steel and concrete was trailing these strings, weaving a great white chrysalis. The whole town was a shiny chrysalis, wrapped around the heat radiating from the earth, and slowly swelling; but when would the giant butterfly emerge? He knew at least that when it did, it would float up into the sky and there its belly would split open, releasing millions of flies with human faces that would bury the city. He could already hear the buzzing of their wings..."

Murakami has us strolling through the narrative with a weird set of characters: An oddball music producer and manager of Hashi, Hashi's all-gay touring band, a sweet model who has a pet crocodile, an array of pimps, thugs, lowlifes and prostitutes in an abandoned, cordoned off area in Tokyo, hilarious prison inmates of Kiku and so many others. A vast set of characters are dropped into an almost dystopian Japan and the crazy thing is that these repulsive characters are so interesting. Ryū Murakami creates these uncontrollably violent characters with unhappy, troubled upbringings, full of disillusion and sorrow, but we still feel for them and completely understand why they commit the actions, say certain things and act in certain ways. We somehow empathize with these men and women, despite their destructive behavior.

The final pages bombard you with an array of feelings: Positive, inspiring, hope, despite the previous 400 pages of despair, surrealism and violence. It's a wild ride with wild characters, but still one of the most touching stories you'll ever read.