Rating: 2/5

DATURA. PENIS. RICE OMELETTE. DATURA. HASHI. COIN LOCKER. KIKU. DATURA.

If you were thinking about reading this book, don't bother. I've just summed it up for you. 

This is quite simply one of the most pointless, irrelevant, and disheartening books I've read. In fact, I gave up after 200 or so pages. While Murakami can certainly string sentences together to create labyrinthian descriptions and the plot is original, there's no heart or soul. There's little to captivate or move the reader, in fact, I found myself only mildly disgusted and apathetic during my reading.

Kiku and Hashi are found abandoned in coin lockers as infants. They are brought up in a GOOD orphanage and are well-provided for, even taken on trips and given presents. Their good fortune extends to being adopted by a perfectly sane, nice couple who live on an island. They're given every opportunity to thrive and become normal adults, but the two are so self-pitying that all they can do is bemoan the fact that they were abandoned as infants. Kiku takes up pole-vaulting and beating people up, but not much else... No personality, no long-term goals. Hashi, somewhat more interesting than his brother, becomes a singer/prostitute and pursues a music career. They both wind up in Toxitown, a BIZARRE chemically-treated area of Tokyo teeming with freaks and hobos. 

Honestly, why should anyone give a shit about these two freaks? They've been given everything they need to have decent lives, and they do nothing but fixate on their biological mothers. They're not interesting, kind, humorous, or driven to do anything but whine and moon around. Kiku and Hashi lead dirty, aimless lives. They don't seem to care much about other people, and Murakami's insane side characters are far more interesting. 

I can only guess that they cling to their coin locker beginnings as a way of holding themselves apart, as something special. Hashi replaces much of that with his singing career, enjoying the illusion, living on the recognition and "uniqueness" of being a singer. He becomes furious when he runs into anyone who knew him before his star rose, only because he can't stand being seen as anything but a musical prodigy. Ego. Kiku is simply a dullard. I couldn't figure out why Anemone even wanted him around. He was a freakish premature ejaculator during their first sexual encounter, does nothing but let her cook for him, and what does he get her for Christmas? AN OMELETTE RECIPE BOOK, so she'll know how to make HIS favorite dish: rice omelettes. Why should a gorgeous, interesting, and eccentric woman like Anemone want a boring, selfish dud like Kiku? It boggles me, but then again a Japanese man wrote this book. I'm assuming there's a cultural difference that I'm just not understanding. 

To top it off, Kiku comes face to face with his birth mother and blows her head off. Great! No answers, no explanations, no apologies. Wham bam, thank you, ma'm! Way to go, buddy. 

I sound like I hate this book, but that's not the case. I simply can't fathom how someone as lauded as Murakami created something so utterly lacking, so pointless that I had to fight to keep my eyes on the page. I've read worse, but I finished THOSE books. This book is hollow in a way I'm not accustomed to. My advice? Move along because there's nothing to see here.