Rating: 4/5

In order to judge short stories one really needs to take a step back and spend some time getting on with life after reading them, because more often than not, their power lies in the aftertaste that they produce—the atmosphere that lingers. 

And Kenji Miyazawa’s tales really do stay.

It's all about the odd moments when, out of nowhere, a line from one of these stories emerges in your mind. Perhaps it’s the expression of a sad little smile that appears before you, or the feeling of a night spent in a strange place that takes you by surprise, or the image of a diabolical fox entrancing you in its many forms. The more one thinks about his tales, the more out-of-this-world they feel.

One quality that stands out is Miyazawa's briskness. He never overstays. The words he uses are mundane yet precise. His stories evoke in a sentence, and end before letting the flower rot. It really is a talent to capture such a tapestry of moods in such short tales. And there is real beauty in them. If there is one thing that seems to permeate throughout all his tales is a sense of innocence. The world might be dark, even cruel at times, but the characters we follow seem oblivious to this fact. And whenever cruelty is exerted it is forgotten and forgiven so quickly. Feelings burn hot when they spark —anger really is felt— but they doesn’t last; they get cold and soon we ask ourselves how could it have burned in the first place. One can really sense a childlike perspective of the world.

Lastly, man as part of nature has never been more present than in Miyazawa's tales. Whether animal or vegetal (or neither) we are all part of a larger, incomprensible ecosystem, and we all deserve to be heard. When the human being loses importance what we’re left with is an animist view wherein frogs work together, flowers talk to one another, and foxes know astronomy—it’s fantastical, absurd, absolutely comic, yet somehow, it is also utterly familiar. One way or another, these tales bear multitude of emotion, and they can’t wait to revel in the beauty and mystery of our natural world.