Rating: 5/5

The Inugami Curse (1951), by Yokomizo Seishi (1902-1981), is the tenth story featuring detective Kosuke Kindaichi, and the second one to be published in English by Pushkin Press. It has been translated by Yamasaki Yumiko. 

It’s considered a classic of Japanese detective literature. 

As should be obvious to anyone who read my review of The Honjin Murders, the first Kosuke Kindaichi novel, and the first Pushkin Press translation, I’m a lover of Japanese detective manga and anime. Reading this book, I couldn’t help to have in mind Aoyama Gosho’s Metantei Conan (Detective Conan / Case Closed in the US). Yokomizo Seishi’s influence on Aoyama Gosho is unmistakable. If The Honjin Murders was a classic closed room murder mystery, The Inugami Curse is another fixture of that contemporary series: serial mysterious murders in a remote mansion. 

Sahei Inugami, head of a textile empire, dies from old age. His family, daughters of illegitimate mistresses, their husbands, children, for whom he only had disdain, and Tamayo, an orphan he adopted and raised as a daughter, are waiting for the return of one of the cousins from the war for the reading of the will. 

Meanwhile, an employee of the lawyer trusted with said will contacts Kosuke Kindaichi, as he thinks a blood bath is in the making. This man is promptly killed. Then, his prediction comes true as, once the convoluted will is read, it appears Sahei Inugami wrote it purely to incite hate and violence among his kin. It doesn’t take long for a second body to drop, and the local police, with the help of Kosuke Kindaichi, race against time to try and stop the curse unleashed on the Inugami family by its deceased patriarch. 

The book is still narrated by the author after the fact, and some dreadful hints often let us expect the next bloody event, adding to the tension. The author also now and then provides the reader with family trees, and summaries of clues and events, to help following along. 

The mystery is complex. The family heirlooms, keys to inheriting the whole Inugami empire, are at the center of it. Clues abound and, all along the book, it seems solving the mystery is in our reach, but we can’t manage to put all the puzzle pieces quite in place. Nor does Kindaichi, at first anyway...

Kosuke Kindaichi is equal to himself. By now, he has acquired quite a reputation, and the police gladly accepts his help, and the mannerisms coming with the character. Indeed, disheveled, easily excited when provided with a new clue, happily scratching his head when deep in thought, and exhilarated when he begins to understand how the events unfolded, Kosuke Kindaichi is quite a peculiar detective. His enthusiasm carries to the reader. The final deductive logic storm is a delight to witness. 

I sure hope the publisher intends to pursue their work translating more of this series. 

Review of book one : https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

Thanks to Pushkin Press and Edelweiss for the ARC provided in exchange for this unbiased review.