Rating: 4/5

1.	 Genre: Wordless 

2.	Summary: This book tells the story of the founding of the United States by venturing from west coast to east coast in order to tell the story “backwards” in a sense. The adventure of a lone traveler starts in Hawaii and ends on the east coast with the arrival of English settlers. The story of the wild west, settling of the plains, and building of east coast colonies are all depicted along the journey.

3.	Critique:
(a)	Comment: The accuracy of the pictures is definite. The pictures show the way of life during critical time periods, days of celebration and death, youth and adulthood, rough times and prosperity. Architecture is also depicted accurately and with great detail. The author has told the story of many different countries through wordless pictures and does a good job of depicting the history of the settlement of the United States in reverse.
(b)	The author uses great details in each of his illustrations. The people depicted are performing many different tasks of the appropriate place and time. The details allow the opportunity for many discussions and discoveries. I would say however that the numerous details and depictions on each page could be distracting. Also, upon further examination, some depictions are not necessarily accurate, but are perhaps added for fun. For example, basketball players are shown alongside a man cooking over an open fire. Overall, the book tells a wonderful story of settlement but perhaps does verge on the edge of being “too much to absorb”, if you will. 
(c)	Some of the depictions that are not necessarily accurate, for example, are the basketball scenario mentioned above (pp. 6), and Santa Claus and a reindeer talking to a woman in town (pp. 12). All of the illustrations however are very detailed and provide the opportunity for wonderful discussion. Despite the occasional inaccuracies that again I believe are probably created in jest, the illustrations show an accurate representation of the settlement of America.

4.	 This book would be a wonderful tool to use during a discussion of the settlement of the United States and could be used over numerous lessons. You could use portions to tell of the settlement of Virginia and the original colonies and use other pages to describe the further settlement west. For this reason is could also be used in a variety of different grade levels. Overall, I fantastic wordless picture book. 
 
Citation: Anno, Mitsumasa (1983). Anno’s U.S.A., The Putnam Publishing Group, New York, NY