Rating: 2/5

I had been wondering where my cat was when the phone rang. It was my brother who was now living as a woman in some part of Tokyo which recently had like a nuclear attack, as far as I remember, but don't quote me. I told him there was no point in ringing me any more as we were now living in the same room together. I don’t think he’d noticed. We were both coin locker babies you know. That’s where your mother is so out of it that when you’re just a new born itty bitty baby coo coo coo your mother shoves you in a coin locker at the bus station and legs it. Most of us coin locker babies asphyxiate horribly in a few hours but a few of us get rescued and that was me and my brother so we were like cool and weird. My brother left home first and me and my adoptive mother went to Tokyo to track him down but when we went to see The Sound of Music at the pictures my adoptive mother got so excited seeing Julie Andrews skipping and yodeling about goats that she had a brain aneurysm right on the spot and died but I couldn’t get my money back so I decided to learn about poisons so I could kill the entire human race because I hate them. So then I found my brother in the nuclear slag pile and noticed straight away that he was wearing make up and a dress and had fake breasts and high heels on so while he was out queening around with the weirdos I picked up the novel I was reading. It was a long one by a not especially modish Japanese writer called Ryu Murakami. It wasn’t the Murakami that writes all the really cool stuff like The Wind Up Chronicle (by the way, I read a review of that one on Goodreads and it cracked me up, it was by this English guy called Paul Bryant, you have to read it.) So anyway I guess these Murakami novelists must get mistaken for each other all the time until the point where at swish dinner parties they just take credit for everything – IQ84 – yeah that’s mine, Coin Locker Babies, mine too, they’re all mine, shut up I am the God damn greatest. Anyway the blurb says the Wind Up Murakami is like The Beatles of Japanese literary fiction and the Coin Locker guy is like The Rolling Stones but nah, I thought the first one was more the Grateful Dead of Japanese fiction, you know, so stoned you fall off the stage and can’t remember how many fingers should be on each hand, er is it five, five? and this Coin Locker guy was Kiss, you know that stupid band with cartoon faces with that guy with the disgusting long tongue, because all his characters are like thinner than paper and race around so fast like they’re trying to prove how lively they are but all the yelling and the manic just gets them frayed at the edges like I was getting so I deliberately left my copy on a bus when I went out to buy the poison to kill the whole human race. The only positive thing was that I never thought for a moment about paying my electricity bill.