Rating: 3/5

I got this book back when I was self studying Japanese in high school. It was encouraging to find an approachable textbook at the time that focused on a subject, apart from Japanese, that I was interested in--manga. I think in that appeal, the audience this series is geared for is probably middle to high school students.

However, in terms of what it was able to teach me, it wasn't much. After having gone through college and taking Japanese classes there, I went through the Genki series, and if you somehow haven't heard, the Genki books are by far some of the best, if not the best, learning material for Japanese.

I still held on to this book (and its sequel), and flipped through it occasionally. Compared to Genki, I think the biggest failures are the order of things taught and what is taught. A lot of the grammar seems to be put aside for vocab, and there are a LOT of kanji, which is not great for beginners. I do like how the author stresses the importance of learning the kana as soon as possible, though it was rather annoying to see romaji still used throughout the book. I feel like that's just holding the student's hand, not really forcing them to learn the alphabets. (Granted, he drops romaji in the sequel, which was a nice improvement.)

I did enjoy the unique chapters, like swear words, onomatopoeia, etc. I've never seen those in other Japanese learning textbooks. Though unsurprisingly he had chapters focusing on those topics, seeing as how the entirety of the book is based around reading manga. (Well known for swear words and sound effects. ;))

For learning normal/formal Japanese though, as in, wanting to really learn the language, this book would not be a starter book. The author focuses a lot on informalities, which is not how people speak in Japanese. And since there is very little grammar, it works more like a review for more intermediate/experienced students versus beginners.

I loved seeing actual manga examples, but when going through them when I did, most of them were just too difficult for me or any beginner.

I never bought the separate workbook, but I'm sure it would've been a nice addition to have alongside this book. The few exercises the book itself has are okay, but they're certainly not enough to drill anything in.

If you're looking for a nice review of Japanese, this book can be kind of fun. If you're a complete beginner, I would save this book for later. Spend your money on the Genki series. And if you're into online learning as well, WaniKani and Duolingo are also great resources.