Rating: 5/5

Sometimes you read a book and it feels so uncannily like it was waiting for you, it's like you've read it before and loved it for years, like you're returning to an old favourite. I began reading In the Miso Soup the moment I received it in the post and extracted it from its envelope, and I just couldn't stop. With this book, I even experienced a genuine episode of that fabled cliche: almost missing my stop on the train because I was so completely absorbed in the story.

Kenji is a tour guide who specialises in helping foreign tourists navigate sex clubs and brothels. This is what makes him appealing to Frank, a boorish, seemingly clueless American who's spending New Year in Tokyo. From their first meeting, Kenji finds Frank disturbing. In a detail that contributes to the feverish and claustrophobic ambience of the novel, a gruesome murder has recently taken place in Kenji's neighbourhood – the victim a teenage girl, the killer unidentified. His idea that Frank is responsible initially seems like a product of paranoia and grim humour, a horrible, outlandish joke. As Frank's stories and behaviour become increasingly bizarre, it all starts to seem frighteningly plausible, yet Kenji can't seem to tear himself away.

I unequivocally loved everything about this. The neo(n)-noir setting of Kabuki-cho, intensely visual in its lucidity. The way Murakami evokes the experience of navigating a familiar place alongside a stranger. The sheer weirdness of Frank: the waxy, inhuman sheen of his skin; the creepiness of the inconsistencies in his storytelling; the scene in which he talks about having had a lobotomy and you don't know which possibility is more frightening – that it's the truth or that he's making it up. That part when Kenji and Jun exit the apartment and there's something stuck to the door – it's utterly flawless, atmospherically sublime, tense, strange.

The brevity of the book is ideal, the pacing excellent. It's so focused and concise. The funny thing is, In the Miso Soup doesn't make me want to read more by Ryū Murakami. I feel like this was such a perfect collision of book and reader that it couldn't possibly be replicated. 

TinyLetter | Twitter | Instagram | Tumblr