Rating: 4/5

high 4s

updated: We watched the 1976 (the original ) version of this film last night, and with only a few changes here and there, it was pretty true to the book. It was also creepy, as I would have expected. I think I'll pass on the 2006 remake, since this one was so good. 

full post here:
http://www.crimesegments.com/2020/01/...

I've long believed that Japanese crime novels (especially the older ones) are sort of in a class unto themselves and in truth take some getting used to, but as someone who's been reading them forever, this is a good one. 

 The death of family patriarch and businessman Sahei Inugami results in an unexpected will that, as the back-cover blurb reveals, pits the members of that family "against each other in a desperate contest for his fortune," and begins a series of some rather nasty deaths. But this is not just another murder mystery, not even close. 

 My issues with this novel were not so much with plot (which I thought was very nicely concocted), but with Yokomizo's penchant for leaning toward the melodramatic and downright cheesy in his word choice/writing style, and then there are his descriptions of certain characters that became repetitive over time to the point where they tended to grate on my inner ear. All the same, I had great fun with this novel and ended up liking it very much, despite the fact that it was not too difficult to figure out the who behind it all. While that's an issue with me most of the time, it bothered me less with this book because it's not just the identity of villain that matters, since there is so much more going on here that completely sucked me into the mysteries at hand. Parts of the plot are seriously demented and even horrific, making it much darker than many Japanese mystery novels I've read, taking it out of the realm of Agatha Christie (where so many readers have placed it) and into much darker territory, where as a mystery reader I feel most at home. 

I would certainly recommend The Inugami Clan , most especially to readers who have some familiarity with older Japanese crime novels.