Rating: 5/5

What kind of people eat miso soup every day? Brown and plain, smelling of human sweat, which nevertheless is both delicate and classy. That's what Frank wonders ever since he ordered a soup at a restaurant in Colorado. Since then, he has wanted to come to Japan, but now, three days before New Year's Eve, the answer to that question does not matter. Like a piece of vegetable in a miso soup, he floats among people.
Although classified as a horror novel, Ryu Murakami’s “In the Miso Soup” is a brilliant allegorical story of the decadence of Japanese society, the disappearance of tradition, loneliness, the feeling of emptiness, and the Stockholm syndrome, from which Japan has suffered since the American postwar occupation. It takes an artist to tell a story within a story, dressed as a genre piece and only a few can do it. Murakami sure has done it. 
Faceless Frank, an American from an unnamed city that fits the description of any American city, has a typical American childhood in the suburbs and a surname that is never the same, thus becomes America, while Kenji with his empty life without any purpose other than that of raising enough money to go to the United States, becomes Japan, and their relationship is morbidly symbiotic.
"In the miso soup" is a horror novel, don't be fooled by allegory and symbolism. The one that puts chills under your skin from the first page as it draws you into the underworld of Tokyo, its glittering streets and sex clubs ready to fill your every fetish. As Kenji spends time with Frank, in the three nights leading up to the New Year, he realizes how much society in Japan has changed, how Japanese high school girls give their bodies just enough to fill the void that rules their lives and drive away boredom unlike the foreign prostitutes who are there to make money for their families, but he also gets to experience true terror in the atmosphere that Murakami so brilliantly builds. It is also that social horror because through the novel we observe a lonely generation without a goal, gad about life in search of something that will move them. 
It's not just symbolism in Kenji and Frank's relationship, Murakami leaves it everywhere while he guides us through the story with his simple yet so effective style, and thus becomes our Kenji, a guide to the demise of Japanese society. Unfortunately, this novel, like many others, has a somewhat prophetic and dystopian character because nowadays the decadence of society is ubiquitous, starting from various reality programs to other things.
If Ellis became the enfant terrible of modern literature of the far West with his "American Psycho", then Murakami with his "In the Miso Soup" is an enfant terrible of modern literature of the far East. It is a novel that simply has to be read for its ingenuity because this is Ryu's finger in the eye. Or rather a middle finger.