Rating: 5/5

Horror neon noir nihilism shot through with a pitch black humour. Loved it! What it lacked in length and plot was certainly made up for in atmosphere: one simply oozing in dread.

Set predominantly in the seedy backstreets of night time Tokyo it centres on twenty year old Kenji who works as a sex tour guide for tourists showing them the best strip joints, peep shows and love hotels on offer, and for a few nights he is hired by an American called Frank who at first appears just like any other another client; but paranoia and tension slowly starts to grip Kenji as he believes that frank is in fact a psychopathic killer. Through Franks strange and erratic behaviour, reports in the news of body parts being discovered in the area and the cold marble eye look in Franks eye, the two of them tour the district with Kenji a nervous wreck fearing some nasty happenings are right around the corner.

I feared this would turn out to be your typical slasher novel but it's nothing of the sort really, and is built more on a sense of mood and unease rather than blood and guts. To describe in simple terms, it's like the calm before the storm. Yeah, there are a few pages of the most sadistic and disturbing violence I have ever come across in fiction which, I had to go over it again because I couldn't quite believe my eyes. The thing is, this didn't really sit in with the rest of the novel. Yes, I always had the feeling that something really bad was going to happen, but I always preferred that eerie sense of foreboding; the not knowing what's around the corner, rather than the actual shocks.

I credit Murakami too as I actually started to feel quite sad and take pity on the main characters, as with themes of loneliness, isolation, lack of identity and mental illness making this far more emotional than your average chiller. It will be remembered for the nasty scenes no doubt, but there is a deeper logic under the surface, and it's under this surface where I found the most rewarding aspects of it. The sort of novel I won't get out of my head for weeks now.