Rating: 4/5

I can't quite date when I first picked up Murakami's 'Coin Locker Babies'. During the long period of reading this book I had to force myself to put it down and not touch it for a decent period of time. Coin Locker Babies is so dark and desperate that I thought it better if I didn't read it for a while. The images it conjures up - though impossible - are so vivid, and will stay with me for a long time.

Japanese rockstar 'Miyavi' wrote a song 'Coin-lockers baby'. The song and the book by Murakami are in no way related, besides their similar sinister subject matter. After I had heard that Ryu Murakami had written a book about new-born babies abandoned in train station coin lockers, I began researching where these artists may have got their inspiration from.

There is an urban myth in Japan, that a mother abandons her new-born in a coin locker in a crowded Tokyo train station. Years later the woman returns to find a boy sitting alone by the lockers, crying. She is surprised that no one is comforting him, and asks him where his father is. The child replies "I have no father!". When the woman asks where his mother is, the boy points to the woman, and vanishes.

Like most myths, they are based loosely on fact. Babies have been found in coin lockers, the most recent found in a Shinjuku train station.

Murakami takes many urban legends and alters them to suit this story. Anemone's pet crocodile is reminiscent of the sewer alligators of America. The abandoned mining village protagonists Hashi and Kiku play in as children is not uncommon in Japan, as many buildings (haikyo) were abandoned after the Japanese economy slump. Many chemical weapons are still being discovered in Okinawa, although none so horrific as the novel's DATURA, due to the American occupation of Japan during and after the war. Although the events in the novel itself are somewhat unbelievable, Murakami truly suspends disbelief, and allows you to enter a world that is probably better left untouched.

Although I am tempted to rate this book five stars, the middle did loose its stamina a little. However, my desire to know how it would end kept me reading.

Like many Japanese authors - Haruki Murakami a good example - the characters in Coin Locker Babies are apathetic to their surroundings. Although desperate to find their mothers who abandoned them, they seem to have little involvement with their environment. The separateness of the characters adds to the mood of the novel, as both the characters and the metropolis Tokyo seem hopeless and somewhat pathetic.

On the topic of translation, I loved Stephen Snyder's interpretation of this work. It did not feel like I was reading a translation, and it had the right amount of obscene language (which is less common in Japanese) to make it believable in English. With such capable Japanese translators out there, it makes me wonder why Alfred Birnbaum's name appears on so many translated Japanese novels.

This book is beautiful in its description of Tokyo, of mother-son amae relationships, and being alone in a big city. If you can handle the graphic first page, you can probably manage the rest of the book. Japan, although it has one of the lowest crime-rates, and one of the highest levels of life expectancy, Murakami shows that there is still a sense of hopelessness which is presented perfectly in the act of silently abandoning your baby in a crowded coin locker.