Rating: 4/5

Death.The constant, cold companion, forever dogging us at our heels, waiting for the right time to take us away. 

Death. The dark carapace of fear that lingers in the darkest crevices of our minds. 

Death. A permanent condition that can be inflicted on you or by you.

Death, or deaths that makes this book what it is. 

A gritty, gruesome, easy to visualize, hard to forget, spine chilling, skin-crawling mystery that will shock you to the core.

It all begins with the death of a wealthy village head and the reading of his will. 

A cursed will, that ignites a fuse to an inheritance battle that leads to a chain of horrific deaths that leave the family and the village in a state of shock. 

Our detective, Kosuke Kindaichi ( a shabby, Japanese Hercule Poirot, with alarming habits) sets his leg forward to try and solve this mystery before the family destroys itself.

This is by no means a difficult mystery. It is quite easy to solve if you are able to make the right connections at the right time. 

The story does not stream off into plenty of tributaries of red herrings like mystery books often do but presents all its elements on a silver platter.

It is just a matter of time and rearranging the clues until it makes sense. 

The solution was indeed quite brilliant but as reveals go, it is not the most surprising.

But what does make it surprising is the audacity of the crimes, the patterns that follow them and the secrets that lay bare details about the family.

The book by itself is like spilled hot blood on white icy snow. An eerily gruesome yet beautiful portrait of crimson red on a stark white background.

Readers who find the grit and gore nauseating, are suggested to approach this with caution but to the other mystery lovers, this is one book you would not want to miss!

Special credits to the translator, Yumiko Yamakazi for making this book as close to the original!

If you've got time to spare and an uncontrollable urge to solve something, this might just be the book for you!