Rating: 3/5

This is a review of the first American edition in 1983.

This was one of the last, if not the, last book that my maternal grandmother bought. Our copy has my grandmother's name written in it. She lived in Florida when she died, which was a long haul from Pennsylvania. Mom could only take a few small things from Granny's home back with her. At the time, she also had four other siblings fighting for Granny's meager stuff. Mom can't remember why she chose this book to bring back. Considering Mom was traumatized by her mother's death, probably not a lot if conscious thought went into the planning.

It's also a mystery as to why Granny bought this. She was not a big reader. She was not into art. Perhaps she bought it with the intention of giving it to one of her many grandchildren. We'll never know.

The story itself has no text, although there is a three page explanation, including hints of what to look out for, at the back of the book.

Anno did make a couple of journeys through America, but that is not the story told here. Since the 1950s or so, it's basically impossible to ride a horse across America, let alone ride one without so much as a backpack of luggage. Not to mention rowing across the Pacific without supplies.

So, put reality aside. This is a fantasy about looking at America's past. What Anno chose to portray shows us more about him than about America. For example, he chooses to portray a funeral during the Old West days. That winds up being arguably the best drawing in the book.

The large color drawings are hypnotic. Anno is much better at drawing landscapes and buildings than figures. Although there are detailed portraits of prominent Americans, very little attention has been given to figures. He also is not very good at drawing horses, and there are horses in almost every page, although he is better at drawing cattle and dogs.

During a parade in New York, there are featured some of Anno's favorite American influences, such as the mythological figures of Paul Bunyan with Babe, and author/artist Maurice Sendak. There also appears to be a giant peach. Unfortunately, James and the Giant Peach was written by an English writer, not an American one.

All in all, a very strange, albeit tranquil, little book about what America looks like to a Japanese man.