Rating: 4/5

I’ve always thought there was something to be said about the strange fascination that American and Japanese culture share with one another. Maybe one of my peers, guilty too of shamelessly mythologizing the East (since we Americans are without the millennial long view of a mythology, or rather what myths there were to be had those first settlers rubbed out with the natives) will put together the defining treatise on the matter. If so in my lifetime, then that author already has themselves one reader. In the Miso Soup doesn’t try to answer exactly how this strange affinity developed between past mortal enemies (one a venerable empire of humorless familial phantoms, warrior poets, and opaque sensibilities; the other an adolescent power of loud and brash tough guys), but instead broods on the theme of loneliness and how this may be the very thing that makes the two cultures such unexpected kindred spirits. How Murakami goes about this is completely his own idiosyncratic way: a fat, vulgar American tourist (with plastic skin) hires a street-savvy but thoughtful Tokyo youth to take him on a safari through the sleazy sex trade pocketed within the nation’s capital city. Our narrator, the Japanese youth, quickly realizes that something is terribly off with his American charge, but the lure of monetary gain muffles his worries, and soon the pair are off on a hellish weekend of sightseeing involving cheap sex, black magic, and mass carnage. But despite its sordid trappings and the extended sequence of brutality which rests in the book’s middle like a Cadbury egg filled with flesh, atrial blood and gristle; the novel uses its grindhouse thriller set-up as vehicle to get our demonic American and hapless Japanese into an extended, bullshit-free conversation about alienation and how that awful bugbear follows you no matter how long you live or how far away from home you run. While not exactly a satire, elements of acerbic irony and disgust purveys this short novel as Murakami condemns his own country for its isolationism, its obsession with consumerism, and its cheapening of the human body. America remains an alluring yet horrifying abstraction throughout the novel, even though the device of an obese, obnoxious American psychopath would have made for an amusing, albeit cheap, satiric device. But a surreal, philosophic slowdown of a last act makes this book a standout as an engaging work by an original talent from our sister nation on the other side of the Pacific.