Rating: 4/5

It's the sound of a coin dropping. It's so loud you could hear a lot of dimes that you get for all the times shitty stuff happens. Those dimes can buy a chinese finger trap of societal problems, or a coloring book. The sound of a baby wailing. The moms aren't going about their business and pissing off everybody else because they have left them in the coin lockers in the train stations of Japan. That's WAY worse than the parents who leave their kids in libraries or toy stores and expect the employees there to watch their kids. Chinese finger trap, I said? I feel some pity for the baby (I feel more pity for the bored kid without even a stinking coloring book) and more pity for my ears picking up the sounds of forced responsibility in forced reception of the misery of others. Bark! Lassie found little orphan Timmy in the well. The smell of vomit and talcum makes a glue that sticks in the nostrils and in the toes stepping on the coast to coast of the ghost you love the most. Sniffing model glue and getting high on rain dances and sacrificing small animals. Hashi was on the serial killer path. Maybe his mom was a prostitute too. What do you do if you don't know where you came from? You could have two out of three serial killer signs. No wonder he had murder in his heart. Put a stethoscope to the heart and it goes like this muuur....murrrrrdeeer. That's what the doctors call a heart murmur. The locker combination to Kiku's heart is voice recognizable. Living on an island Hashi's murmur says that yes, a man can be an island. Say it again with feeling! Bitterness, hate, weeds growing too close together in a garden of vipers and feral dogs. The cat is in the cradle and the silver spoon in the mouth or something. Cat Stevens became somebody else. Hashi destroys without creating and pretends there was a silver spoon in his mouth instead of a plated coin.

Bam! My Japanese coloring book (I'm not making this up for the sake of a goodreads review. I honestly have a Japanese language coloring book) says jump! Kiku the pole vaulter leaps the pages to find his brother. Sticks, stones and names hurt. Hashi sold out! But the dream! We were going to grow up and enact revenge on Japan for what our mothers did! Revenge on people like Mariel who silently pray for that baby to shut the hell up already. We're gonna make her eat nasty eggplant. She hates eggplant. (I'm not being weird, I swear. Kiku really does want to kill Japan with poison extracted from a special kind of eggplant. Eggplant is bad enough already!) When I was a weird kid I wrote (well, mostly they were verbal. Writing is hard) stories about orphans in a fucked up town I called "Bikini Town" that was an awful lot like Toxitown area of Tokyo in this book, complete with radioactive town dump (I was disappointed by how little Toxitown actually features in this book. It'd stroke my ego a bit to read something that reminded me of how perverted young me was). My pimp wasn't a music producer gorging on fat to stifle his homosexual sex drive so he could get down to the business of knowing what will SELL SELL SELL, but a pimp dog (named "Pimp Pup. That's right. He had bitches!). It is hard to be unoriginal, I tell you. Coin Locker Babies beat me by several years. That's the sound of me sighing with the pain of being unoriginal. Maybe the radioactive vibes carried on the air to my ears. I used to "visit" Ryu Murakami's books back when my town had actual bookstores that weren't dropping off like the dead flies with the faces of Hashi's potential murder victims. It was in the back of mind to read him, I swear. Right next to some perversions 'cause that's what the back of the mind is for. I did see Audition years ago. I'm pretty sure that I liked it. *

Coin Locker Babies is about hitting the right note. The book jacket says it's about a bisexual glam rocker ruling over Toxitown and a pole vaulter and his crocodile loving model girlfriend. Those things are in the book but it isn't what Murakami was trying to masturbate like the reader was his glockenspiel and xylophone and keytar all in one Dick Van Dyke's dick (I mean accordian). It didn't. Hit the right note, that is. You know how tough it is to be a rapper who butters your bread with the selling power of the fat of the streets and then the margarine isn't the same as the butter because it's not fatty enough and just imitation pain? Maybe the public doesn't fancy Fabio's chest hair as much as they used to. That's too much of Coin Locker Babies. Selling out. The nature of celebrity is one of the story types that interests me into the negative. Coloring with glitter scratch and sniff toxic crayons. If they had been whiter crayons they could have sold more records (all of those crying infants has turned me into a cynic). Did Hashi and Kiku's mothers sell them out by leaving them in those lockers? Sure, why not. Hashi sold himself out when he denied the not regulation carnation pink family he did have (Kiku) for the electric blue identity of the self he wanted to see. Maybe he had unrequited desire for the athletic brother from another mother (I bet my coloring book he did). It could be a problem that the famous face that they forget where they came from. I should have listened to the movie stars crying. It didn't bang my gong that Hashi and Kiku remembered how to imagine the dum dum dum of their mother's imagined hearts. They were in side by side coin operated prisons! Orphanages and dog blood. I was unmoved. (I wasn't alone in the womb. I should remember what it feels like!)

Kiku's girlfriend is the teenaged fashion model Anemone. Anemone is the untouchable colored in by everyone who sees her pretty girl that couldn't possibly have any problems. Lights! Camera! Action! What's that sound? It sounds like money like Daisy from The Great Gatsby. You know how your own voice doesn't sound like your own when you hear a recording of yourself? That's Anemone in the eyes of others. It could have been like a celebrity, or Jesus. Everybody's got their hands out. Murakami did a better job of Anemone's boredom (the sound of all the voices that I can add my own to in the perfect broken record recording) than Hashi's the problems of gangsta rappers. Will anything good ever happen? Did anything good ever happen? Let's play that record again for clues. I'll visit Murakami again because the boredom feels someplace like the back of my mind. That's like a return from the creature of the black womb. Yeah, I'm still feeling sorrier for the kid without the coloring book than for the screaming kid. I relate more to frustration than to rage, maybe.

Things that I learned from Coin Locker Babies because this is a MOVIE and if this were the IMDB there would be a thread about all of the things that I learned from Kindergarten. Everything I ever needed to know, that's what. (And I turned out just fine!) There would also be two hundred threads like this: "Hashi: Gay?". 

1. Eggplant can kill you. No kidding. I can't stand this stuff. I once ate eggplant just to be polite. It was exactly like this. (That's a youtube link of me/Tom Hanks eating eggplant/sardines and not enjoying it very much.)
2. Dogs are heroes.
3. The shaved eyebrow look was popular in the 1980s.
4. Jeff Goldblum's face appears on one out of a million flies and if you are a mouth breather one of these WILL fly into that fly trap of an open mouth and you'll go insane. 
5. Taxi drivers looooove to talk your ear off. If they don't, you'll run into a toxic dump and it'll finish the job.
6. Crocodiles are expensive to maintain if you don't already live in the appropriate swamp-like environment. Luckily my pet alligator is a hand puppet and only bites the hand that feeds it.
7. Filipino character Tatsuo would have made more money as a prostitute than his girlfriend if he knew what I knew (I lied! There is ONE thing I didn't learn in Kindergarten) that his toothlessness would have made a nice simulation for a vagina. They could have gone home sooner in half the time. That made him...rootless!
8. Mark the spot with some kind of a reminder if you are going to bury guns. It's not as easy as you'd think it'd be to find them again.
9. Answer "Music" as an interest because your John just might also be a music producer. If he's a politician don't give a straight answer. You like every man kind of things.
10. Eating fat cures homosexuality. So that's why there's an obesity problem in the American south!
11. Jocks are stupid.
12. Prison isn't so bad as long as you stay busy.
13. Dolphins are heroes.
14. DATURA is the deplorable word from C.S. Lewis' The Magician's Nephew.
15. Women who abandon their children like to take it up the ass.

*Footnote- I heard of this Murakami years ago because of the film Audition and my interest in the phenomenon of child abandonment in Japan. I'll tell you what isn't a good story of this. The film Noriko's Dinner Table (a veeery loose sequel to the same director's Suicide Circle. The movie with the gross skin roll and backwards messages in teeny bopper musicc). She was a pimp! Not to mention an accomplice to murder. The buddhist shit just didn't work. A mother fucking pimp. Thank you. Nobody Knows is a good film even though they changed some of the worst details to make a happier sorta film (yeah right).