Rating: 4/5

The GR synopsis tells you all you need to know of the plot, so my review is for those who've read that much, and are still on-the-fence about whether to read In The Miso Soup. Consider this review a Ben Franklin checklist from which you can total the scores on each side of your personal reading ledger, and make that call for yourself.

But before we get to that, my rating reflects two values that are in tension with one another - writing style, for which In The Miso Soup deserves a 5, and "did the novel work, as a whole", for which In The Miso Soup deserves a 3.5. The 4 stars I gave it - I initially gave it a 3 but bumped it up - reflect that tension.

In favor of reading it:
1.	In The Miso Soup is unforgettable. In a world of genre novels readers enjoy in the moment and forget within weeks, and classics that we remember but from which we sometimes are distracted or put down after 200 pages, notwithstanding the ensuing guilt, most readers read precious few novels that fall in the middle turf of contemporary literature. (I am uncertain when I read the synopsis of a Reacher novel whether it's one I've read before, because the formula is so constant, and my TBR is full of works I’d like to read some day, but keep pushing off in favor of the immediately accessible.) The tension Murakami creates from page 1 and steadily ratchets up with no humor or other tension-breakers, grabbed me and made it impossible to think about anything but page turns. Almost every page communicates either the high potential for violence, the memory of violence, or . . . violence. In the interest of full disclosure, I needed to put it down and read something else for a couple of evenings because the thought process of one character had eaten into my soul and was bothering me. I can’t think of the last novel that impacted my reality to that extent.
2.	Murakami’s characters are authentic. Even those who pass through the novel briefly speak in their own voices, not 8 different versions of Murakami’s voice. (yes, John Green, I mean you.) The reason Frank makes every reader’s skin crawl from the initial moment we meet him is that Murakami makes a monster real, believable, threatening, and capable of anything at any moment. The reason the various female characters work as characters is that they are not archetypes, but reflect their experiences, their ages, their backgrounds. 
3.	The plot is focused. It takes place over a 3-day period and, like Poe, Murakami doesn’t waste any words on anything that doesn’t drive his story to its conclusion. 
4.	Japanese culture/history. In The Miso Soup provides a brief window into a contemporary part of Tokyo, awareness of the nightlife culture, compensated dating, the relationship between Japanese and foreign tourists, and our somewhat lost protagonist, Kenji – a nice enough young man, going nowhere in terms of his career and goals.
5.	This.

Men like him, managers of soaplands and Chinese clubs and S&amp;M clubs, not to mention gigolos and pimps – men who eke out a living exploiting women’s bodies – all have one characteristic in common: they look as if something has eroded away inside them. . . . I saw a news report on North Korea. It was about how people were starving there, and they had shots of some of the children. And in the faces of those skinny, dying kids was the same whatever-it-is that you see in the faces of men who live off the traffic of women’s bodies.

and this.

She wanted to find out about the gods of this country, but she couldn’t find any books on the subject in Spanish, and she doesn’t read English, so she asked a lot of her customers, but apparently none of the Japanese knew anything, which made her wonder if people here never came up against the kind of suffering where you can’t do anything but turn to your god for help. . . 

and then this.

The Japanese had never experienced having their land taken over by another ethnic group or been slaughtered or driven out as refugees – because even in World War II the battlefields were mostly in China and Southeast Asia and the islands of the Pacific, and then Okinawa of course, but on the mainland there were only air raids and the big bombs – so the people at home never came to face to face with an enemy who killed and raped their relatives and forced them all to speak a new language. A history of being invaded and assimilated is the one thing most countries in Europe and the New World have in common, so it’s like a basis for international understanding. But people in this country don’t know how to relate to outsiders because they haven’t had any real contact with them. That’s why they are so insular. According to the Lebanese man, Japan’s just about the only country in the world that’s been untouched, except for the U.S. But he said of course there’s a bright side to that too and started telling her about [] saying that precisely because the Japanese have never experienced a real invasion, there’s a certain gentleness here you can’t find in other countries, and that they’ve come up with these incredible methods of healing.

Don’t read it:
•	After a climactic scene midway through, In The Miso Soup lost a little steam and didn’t seem as sure of where it was headed. The ending is fine, as far as it goes, and in fact I had a sense that Murakami almost wanted to get that scene out of the way in order to focus on Kenji and Frank discussing violence with all of Frank’s cards on the table, so to speak. But no matter how well-written a conversation or dialogue is (excluding The Grand Inquisitor from The Brothers Karamazov), if it is extended, the intensity and pace slows. Still, slowed intensity in this context means, you were driving 200 mph on the Autobahn for a few hours and now you’re only going 110 mph on a 6-lane US highway. In the Miso Soup is less than 200 pages. It’s not as if it’s a major time-commitment. 
•	If you wish you hadn’t read The Silence of the Lambs because it bothered you, you are likely to regret even holding this novel in your hand.
•	Finally, if you were horrified by the underlying crime and perspective described in The Dinner by Herman Koch, there’s a similar thread here.

As you can tell, if you've read other reviews of In The Miso Soup, it's difficult to recommend because of its subject matter and impact on the reader, except with a ton of disclaimers. That's my excuse for the length of this review. I recommend it highly, but it's not for the unwary, to be certain.