Rating: 2/5

I received this book used from a friend, who thought he could give himself a crash course in Japanese and be a semi-fluent tourist in less than a couple months. Pretty naive, but he wouldn't be the first to underestimate the learning curve of this language. And a beginner who might pick Japanese in Mangaland thinking it will be easy, is probably making the mistaken (but reasonable) assumption that the book would at least start with manga written for a childrens' reading level.

It doesn't, though. A beginner would hit a wall immediately, when the book suggests they master the hiragana and katakana writing systems before beginning even learning "konnichiwa". If the reader were to proceed anyway, they would get hit with large amounts of vocabulary in each lesson, without yet having the grammar or expressions with which to use it. So, maybe rote memorization is expected here. Now, isn't the manga supposed to provide the fun and interesting context for learning all of this? Maybe it would have, except for the next problem: the kanji. The manga (a mix of obscure material apparently licensed from a single publisher that agreed to be featured) begins immediately with kanji characters that would require at least high-school literacy. The poor reader has only just learned "numbers" (one through ten, hundreds, etc.), and literally their first manga example is a panel with the speech bubble 「帝国第六機甲軍が…八百万の艦隊が…」I shit you not, that is the actual first example. (╯°□°）╯︵ ┻━┻ Yes, technically, that sentence includes a real-world example of the words for "6th," and for "8 million." But no sane teacher should choose this as the best teaching material.

Realizing that this is useless as a starting point, each such example includes first a romaji transcription, and then a "literal" or rough translation into English that the author uses as an intermediary between the original text and a full English translation. Unfortunately, this intermediate language includes an arbitrary collection of abbreviations for grammatical jargon that doesn't translate literally, so his rough translations are peppered with nonsense syntactic markers like "EP" and "DOP". By the end of the book I still hadn't memorized his notation. I wish he had just left those parts in Japanese. If you don't understand the function of the Direct Object particle を, replacing it with DOP is not helpful, and just adds another layer of comprehension to drill through.

It's unfortunate that the material couldn't have been paced better, that the examples couldn't have been selected to match the reading level, or that the excerpts couldn't have been more than a single panel. These might as well have been examples from toaster instruction manuals, or ads found on the walls of the Tokyo subway system.

I am not a complete beginner, and so I was at least able to get through the book without having to stop and do exercises. If I had been a beginner, I would have been better served by several other textbooks, but at least it's good to see that this one has more recently been given its own workbook. Without a workbook or something to practice on, the lessons in Japanese in Mangaland would be quickly forgotten. Counters and days of the week are simple topics to begin with, but they're useless to have first, aren't they? Most of the grammar required to understand a simple sentence of manga dialogue would require basically finishing half the book. This is an inherent problem with trying to learn a language in real-world source material before you have a grounding in it. We shouldn't dismiss the banal phrases like "this is a pen"; they do serve a purpose.

For an intermediate language learner, a book like this could be a fantastic learning tool. With understanding of enough grammar, maybe manga panels could be selected to illustrate individual finer points or issues of nuance in translation. Once you're at the intermediate level, perhaps you can encounter a sentence and focus only on a single confusing aspect of it rather than being confused by the entire sentence.

So, while in concept this book might have worked, in the end it ultimately is just a mediocre textbook with some drawings in it. It has some usefulness in learning some informal forms of speech alongside classroom ones – including swear words! Japanese in the clasroom is different enough from Japanese in entertainment media that a book like this has merit in theory.

And as a final complaint, despite this being a Second Edition, there are small mistakes throughout the book. Nothing major, but a sloppy typo or two; in one place, an entire copy/pasted paragraph located in the wrong chapter. In its defense, this is an English translation edition of the Spanish original. The errors might be in localization.