Rating: 4/5

Sahei Inugami is a very wealthy business man, but he has a from rags to riches story. When he hit rock bottom, he had help from a priest. It’s the priest’s help that turned his life around for the better. And his gratitude towards the priest stayed strong throughout the years. He even took in the priest’s granddaughter into his own home after her parents died and treated her like family.

When Sahei’s time is running out, there’s a whole army of children and grandchildren by his deathbed. None of them care about Sahei’s impending death, they’re just impatiently waiting to see who gets to inherit the most. Tamayo, the priest’s granddaughter, is the only one who seems to genuinely care about the man lying on his deathbed.

When Sahei dies, the will does not get read. According to Sahei’s wishes, the will should be read only when everybody is present, this includes his grandson who hasn’t come back from the war yet.

Kindaichi receives a disturbing letter that predicts a bloody future for the Inugami family. Then the content of the letter comes true, people start dropping like flies. And the question arises: who is trying to get a bigger piece of the inheritance?

Even good intentions can lead to great tragedy, that’s the core theme of this book. And it’s up to Kindaichi to find and stop the killer. The mystery plot is interesting and it has a lot of twists and turns. Even though the list of logical suspects is rather small and some twists can be a bit predictable, it still managed to keep me hooked from start to finish.

Once again, it’s the narrator who sometimes keeps the story from reaching its full potential for me personally. Like when Kindaichi saves someone in the beginning of the story, the narrator points out that if Kindaichi hadn’t saved that person, he’d have solved the mystery much quicker. This third person omniscient narrator fits the complex mystery plot well, but sometimes it just gives us a bit too much information. There’s also a natural distance that can be felt between the narrator and the characters, which can make it a bit harder to become invested in the characters.

Quite a complex but strong and gripping story. The events of the past and the present are woven into each other perfectly to create an intriguing web of mystery.