Rating: 5/5

Ryū Murakami pulls a Haruki and gives us some serious surrealism, wrapped in a dystopia that in hindsight appears shockingly prescient. As infants, our protagonists Kiku and Hashi are abandoned in coin lockers, but fortunately, they are found and grow up in an orphanage and later a foster family. At 16, they live in Toxitown, a polluted ghetto in Tokyo and haven for all kinds of misfits and criminals. But the two outsiders fight the odds: Bisexual Hashi becomes a rockstar and marries his manager Neva, Kiku becomes a famous pole vaulter (hello, metaphor) and falls in love with Anemone, a model who lives with a pet crocodile. When Hashi meets a woman he deems to be the mother who abandoned him, both of their lives change yet again... 

Murakami gives Kiku's and Hashi's date of birth as 1972, and the novel was first published in 1980, so the author wrote about the past, the present and the future. To abandon babies in coin lockers is a form of child abuse that really occurs in Japan, although it was more common during the time depicted (Japan legalized the contraceptive pill in 1999). When the book came out, the country was experiencing an economic boom, and Murakami wrote Toxitown as the ugly face of the corrupt and glittering metropolis of Tokyo - the underworld that exposes the clean image of a heartless town. We now know that in reality, the boom ended in a bursting economic bubble. The pollution and toxicity that are a recurring theme in the novel now make us think of Fukushima and the gas attack on the Tokyo subway, events that hadn't happened yet when the book was published. 

Once again, it's intriguing how Murakami uses characters in order to illustrate milieus and make points: We meet beggers, prostitutes, greedy managers, drug addicts, preachers, and many others, and the whole plot revolves around the relationship between Kiku and Hashi. These two have been betrayed by their families and by society, and while they share many pivotal experiences, they are very different characters who, accordingly, are trying different paths in order to deal with their feelings of abandonment, alienation, sadness and anger. The author also puts a particular spotlight on female characters, as Neva lost both of her breasts to cancer and struggles with the consequences while Anemone is very aware of her role as a model in a capitalist world. 

This book is wild and brutal and daring and over-the-top and addictive and bold - that's my kind of literature. I have to admit that with every Ryū Murakami I am reading, I find his works more intriguing. If you want to hear more about his themes and narrative strategies as well as how they compare to Haruki's, you can listen to our "Murakami vs. Murakami" podcast special (in German): https://papierstaupodcast.de/podcast/...