Rating: 4/5

This is it: 
"His tongue clicking sharply into the mike, Hashi reeled off the names of the band members as shreds of glittering foil rained from the ceiling marking the end of the concert. 'Thank you. Thank you,' he murmured. 'We couldn't do it without your love. Tonight I want you to pray with me for the souls of three girls attacked in a park in Yokohama almost seventy years ago. A sailor on leave butchered them, gouged out their stomachs, and jerked off inside those hollow things. Tonight, let's pray for their soulds; let's pray for love, as only love is going to save this world, my friends. Thank you.' As Hashi finished, a line of club-wielding security guards with attack dogs flanked the stage and headed toward the front row of the audience"

Isn't it incredible? At a glitzy pop concert: the gruesome truth of our hideousness, a trite message about love ... enter snarling dogs and men with clubs. Isn't that who we are? 

Or perhaps we are better seen as the vacuous guests at the end of a celebrity party:
"By now, the skinny boy with the armful of muscle relaxant was just finishing his act and acknowledging the applause; in the course of it he had managed to fill himself with a solid gold dildo as big around as a newborn baby. And on that note the party broke up,"

That's the world.

The first time I read this I felt there was something hopeful in Hashi's singing to the towers at the end. I believed that his singing would save everyone who heard it. But now I'm not so sure.

Woop! Kiku's mum was from Kochi! Perhaps.

Other bits:
"The truth was, he needed Hashi as much as Hashi needed him, the way a healthy person sometimes needs a disease, imaginary though it may be, as a kind of retreat, a safe haven from the problems of the real world."

"Kiku suddenly wanted to scream, to turn himself into a huge jet plane and bomb the hell out of the bugs, the leaves, this window, Kuwayama's machine, the lighthouse."

"the bike collapsed with a rusty squeal, like a pig having a spike driven into its head,"

Funny (we are the useless screaming audience):
"For some reason, their uncaring eyes made Kiku furious, and in an instant he had left Hashi, decked the emcee with one punch, and was kicking the woman in the stomach. The audience continued to scream until he was subdued by the doddery band."

"I'm bored, he thought, standing on the practice field. The warm, soft breeze blowing from the sea was particularly unbearable."

This made me cry, speech from adopted mum:
"'I know you're feeling burned -up inside,' she said at last. 'I wish you'd tell me if there's something that's happened since you came to us to make you and Hashi feel this way. If you told me what we've done, I could apologize, try to find a way to make it up to you.'"

"Kiku felt a bit let down: the magic formula for annihilating the human race, for wiping out the entire planet, was ... a kind of eggplant."

"'Break his arm!' D urged. 'See if you can make him cry.'
Make me cry? thought Kiku to himself – that's all they've done since the day we were born."

First orgasm:
"Suddenly a feeling not unlike the urge to pee swept through his body and gathered behind his eyes. From his eyes it invaded his brain, eating away at a wall of cartilage that had been concealing a part of him that now quivered to life; and with that quiver, Hashi realized that his whole body was trembling."

Hashi's singing:
"'Who else you ever heard could crawl inside people's heads and stroke their brains?'" 
"Hashi on tour sounds more like a seal in full rut. The 'new' voice … clings to you like a coating of oily sludge that refuses to be washed away in even the longest, hottest shower."

This made me cry#2, speech from adopted dad:
"'I guess I haven't been much of a father,' he said.
'Why do you say that?' laughed Hashi, looking back over his shoulder. Kuwayama was rubbing his eyes.
'Well, what I mean is ... you with so much on your mind and all ...' He waved as Hashi walked away ... feebly, like the leg of a bug stripped of its wings and antennae, wriggling in a dark hole. 'Take care of yourself now!' Kuwayama called. 'Take care!'"