Rating: 4/5

'In the Miso Soup,' by Japanese novelist Ryu Murakami (no relation to the more famous Murakami) is a short 217-page read. Some GR reviewers described it as a "one-sitting" read, but it took me 3 days because I'm such a slow reader. Gone are the days when I could read 200 pages of a literary classic in a day. Even in those halcyon (Triazolam?) times, 200 pages for a full day's read was only a pace of about 20 pages per hour, far from the average 60 pages an hour the average reader can consume.

'Miso Soup' is one of those genre-fiction novels that succeeds as a work containing some philosophical and social observations intertwined with a story involving extreme violence and many moments of suspense and tension. The late Roberto Bolano wrote an essay deriding the snobbery of many readers in relegating what they termed "genre fiction" into a scrap heap of short-lived diversions, read and forgotten, offering no "truths" about the bigger issues that puzzle and confront readers of "serious" fiction. This is a topic that could stir up an acrimonious debate among readers, but I would put Ryu Murakami in that class of "genre" fiction writers whom Bolano was describing--a writer of sometimes disturbing tales interspersed with insights about important social issues.

The scenario of 'In the Miso Soup' is set in Kabuki-cho, one of Tokyo's sex worker districts where foreigners are allowed. Most of the female and transgender workers there are down-at-heel and have seen better days. Though the book doesn't use the term, in Japan an unwed girl over age 25 is known as "Christmas cake," meaning her "sell by" date has passed. Kenji is a twenty-year-old Japanese living in Tokyo and self-employed as a guide for foreign sex tourists seeking sexual pleasure in what the Japanese used to call, "the water trade." He advertises his services in a sleazy rag catering to foreign male tourists who want to sample Tokyo's "sex industry." Most of his customers in the two years he's been been a Virgil to gaijin sex tourists are middle-aged Americans. 

Kenji leads a life in the shadows and the best part of his existence is his relationship with his girlfriend, Jun. Jun is still in high school but spends a lot of time with Kenji and they clearly have a close bond. Kenji has few aspirations other than to save up enough money to one day move to America, a goal he seems to realize will never happen. 

Murakami uses Japan's huge sex industry to point out the loneliness and isolation many feel in Japanese society. Kenji notes that in the past, most "sex tourists" were older men but that now the clubs are routinely patronized by decrepit salary men and handsome, well-heeled young Japanese who prefer paid sex and carousing to having a girlfriend. In some clubs, the desperate middle-aged guys queue up in long lines just for the chance to chat with teenage girls. And some teenage girls work the seamy areas as "paid companions," earning yen by dating older men, the implication being that both the girls and the men are lonely.

Kenji's life changes when he gets involved with his new client who calls himself Frank. Frank bears some resemblance to his movie namesake, Frank Booth, as played by Dennis Hopper in "Blue Velvet." Frank is American, or claims to be, and is one of the most bizarre characters I've come across in a work of fiction--bearing in mind that I'm not a reader of the horror or "weird" genre literature. I'm sure among some characters in those genres he would be pretty run-of-the-mill..

Kenji immediately gets a creepy vibe from Frank, noticing that his skin looks synthetic and is cold to the touch and his back story seems suspect and implausible. Frank claims to be from New York and says he imports Toyota radiators. It is near New Year's Day in Japan, a very special time akin to Christmas in the US. Frank claims he just wrapped up some business that day, which Kenji finds suspicious since few Japanese business people would be working so close to the holiday.

Kenji's first night with Frank brings Frank's menace and overall strangeness into more focus. Kenji has guided over 200 foreign men through Tokyo's low-rent sex district, but never anyone like Frank. Here's a quote from the novel of Kenji's impressions:

"All Americans have something lonely about them . . .but Frank had taken it to a whole new level. There was a falseness about him, as if his whole existence was somehow made up."

This "falseness" comes across in Frank's many incongruities. He meets Kenji in a cheap hotel that a "rich" American businessman is unlikely to stay in. He's dressed in a cheap suit but has plenty of money, and as the evening progresses his stories about his past life contradict one another and Frank doesn't seem to care if they do. At one point, for example, he tells Kenji he grew up playing baseball with his brother; at another point he says he was the only male child and had many sisters.

Frank also appears to hide a dangerously bad temper beneath an affable veneer. Kenji notices that when situations don't go his way, or people annoy him, he almost transmutes into a totally different-looking person and an evil look appears on his face until Kenji uses his tact to mollify him. As the first night progresses, Kenji begins to suspect that Frank is quite possibly a killer. Before coming to work that night, Kenji had listened to a news report of a young prostitute's body being found the previous night in Kabuki-cho, and that police were investigating the death as a murder. He and Frank coincidentally pass by the yellow tape marking off the crime scene and Kenji gets an eerie feeling that maybe Frank had something to do with the murder and maybe their passing by the scene wasn't really coincidental.

Kenji and Frank visit a lingerie club and chat up a few girls. Kenji's suspicions mount when Frank pays a check with a 10,000 Yen bill that has a bloodstained thumbprint in the middle, or at least the stain LOOKS like blood. Murakami does a good job of building suspicion and tension. Frank continues to reveal new sides as he discourses intelligently on a great many subjects. Next stop is a peep show where the girl is shown naked and the customer (male) can stick his penis in a hole and be "handled." Frank shows no signs of pleasure after the visit and the night becomes stranger when he and Kenji end up at a batting cage somewhere in the neighborhood. The night is cold and, nearby, a homeless man lies on a piece of cardboard trying to keep warm. Kenji and Frank both take turns at bat and Frank, supposedly a former player, makes a fool of himself and stands with the bat in odd positions as a baseball whizzes at him at 100 km per hour.

Kenji returns home exhausted and Jun is at his place to greet him. He shares his suspicions about Frank. The next morning, he wakes to find what appears to be a piece of flesh glued to his door handle. He's not sure it's a piece of flesh, but it sure looks like it. This creeps him out even more because he's pretty sure the flesh is a less-than-subtle message from Frank that he knows where Kenji lives and that Frank wants to let him know he's a killer. Meanwhile, the morning news reports a homeless man was found dead in the bathroom of a park close by the batting range where Kenji and Frank had ended their first night. Kenji is pretty sure that Frank killed some homeless man, if not the one they saw.

On the second night, Frank declaims that he "wants sex," so Kenji takes him to a club where a lot of working girls go and they sit at tables across from the men and guys can write notes to them asking if they want to have a drink and get to know each other better. Since Kenji is there as a paying customer, he is also expected to write a note to try and woo a woman. They choose a couple of ladies who agree to join them at their table. Frank quickly becomes irritated when his companion says she wants to visit America to see, "Niketown," a now closed Nike "superstore" that was on E. 57th Street in New York. Being (or claiming to be) a New Yorker, Frank has never heard of Niketown and is offended by the woman's crass materialism and launches into a diatribe about crass consumerism and berates the woman for her shallowness. Clearly his ire has risen. Then he lets Kenji see behind his menacing facade to the real monster he is, doing this by demanding Kenji leave the club. He then proceeds to slice and dice all the ladies in the club and burns the face off the club's manager. He then lets Kenji back in to see the carnage.

The rest of the novel involves the tension and suspense in the interplay between Kenji and Frank, as Kenji is pretty certain Frank is going to kill him.

Every New Year's Eve in Japan, temple bells all over the country chime 108 times in a ceremony having to do with their godless Buddhist religion, with the 108 bells representing the 108 fleshly desires of humans. Listening to the bells is suppose to absolve the listener of past year's sins.

Frank, perhaps in some twisted expiation, wants to hear the bells and gets the scoop from Kenji on the best location for listening. Kenji calls Jun and tells her to be waiting for him on the bridge he has recommended for hearing the bells. He advises her that Frank IS a killer and that if she cannot spot him on the bridge, to scream for the police. Kenji and Frank then traipse around with Frank pontificating about various topics, including his need to kill. They visit Frank's real hotel, which turns out to be a dilapidated building contaminated with Dioxin, though Frank notes that it is perfectly safe since Dioxin is only harmful when burned. Perhaps in the psychopathic character of Frank, Murakami is making some statement about America? I am hesitant to guess.

Kenji and Jun reunite on the bridge as people wait for the bells to chime, and Kenji looks for Frank but he has disappeared into the night. Kenji is unsure why he's been spared but life--for him--will go on.