Rating: 4/5

I read THE HONJIN MURDERS last month and gave myself a few weeks before coming to THE INUGAMI CLAN, the second of Seishi Yokomizo's books to be newly translated into English. I enjoyed myself even more this time, and I hope these are successful so we get even more Yokomizo translated.

This was written in 1950 and sometimes it is quite obvious. It's set in 1945 and has the feel of an older mystery, in many ways you could compare it to Agatha Christie with its complexity, formality, and eccentric detective. But it can also be quite gruesome, perhaps not compared to today's mystery novels, but certainly compared to the usually bloodless deaths of Christie and others from the early 20th century. 

Once again I enjoyed how intricately all the elements of the story were bound together. I enjoyed the way the omniscient narrator will tell you when a clue is important or when someone is about to die. I even enjoyed how the detective made an itemized list of everything that happened at one point, so you could all consider it together. 

This time I figured out one of the big reveals early. Like about as soon as it happened quite early in the book. It was not such a tough one for a mystery reader. (Literally said to myself aloud, "But then who could it be--oh right!") It gave me a little more insight as the book unfolded, but not all that much. I was still surprised by the solution. I like being surprised by the solution, I like knowing just enough to have some hunches but still finding that it was more complex than I could pick through. 

There also wasn't as much "of its time"-ness as I expected from the book. A gay relationship is a plot point, involving a character who is clearly bisexual, and while everyone is shocked by it and acknowledges that it couldn't have been known publicly without shame, no one takes any time to be horrified or disgusted. It just is what it is. A female character's beauty is referred to almost constantly. A man with a cognitive disability is treated pretty much the same as everyone else. Romantic relationships between cousins are treated as the norm. The only thing that irked me was how a man's face, deformed by a war injury, was described with such disgust. So all things considered, it was surprisingly unaffected by the kinds of antiquated viewpoints that can impact reading an older genre book. I wonder if that was intentional in choosing which book to translate.

I think I liked this one more than THE HONJIN MURDERS, as it wasn't quite so devoted to the single idea of the locked room mystery, which was fun but does require something so elaborate it can be hard to believe.