Rating: 4/5

_Future Shock_ is one of those books that always seemed to be on the table at every used bookstore, flea market, and garage sale. The brightly colored cover made it easy to spot, and the breathless tagline, "this book can help the US survive our collision with tomorrow," made it just as easy to write off as hokey predictions about "The Future" from the vantage point of early 1970's. But I'm here to argue that it is definitely worth your time. 

Despite appearances, this is not a book of weird, absurdly anachronistic predictions, but I will admit that I thought it would be. Instead, Toffler states, unequivocally, that "[n]o serious futurist deals in 'predictions'" (p.5). He is instead offering a case for adaptation to technological change. 

It does not take long to see that Toffler is not dealing in predictions. Rather, he seems to be offering extrapolations based on interpretation of then-current events. And this might be a fine line but how far away from current events do forecasts need to be before they become predictions? If I see a glass of water falling off the counter, is it a prediction that it will break or an extrapolation of the available facts? Similarly, if I see colleagues working long hours and bringing work home on mobile devices, is it a prediction that they are heading toward burnout or extrapolation? Toffler operates in this gray space but rarely makes predictions that are wildly speculative or outlandish based on the information he is drawing upon (and citing!)

Toffler argues that acceleration, transcience, novelty, and diversity are what I think of as change conditions. They describe the character of changes in our relationships to technology, to family, to work, to entertainment, to government, to all aspects of our lives. Across all of these realms, Toffler offers an astonishingly specific and referenced body of research showing that these changes were/are happening and can make it more difficult for individuals to adapt. Instead of adapting, Toffler finds evidence that people are, at best, coping with accelerated change by building "enclaves" of stability where we seek out sameness, quiet, habit, and ritual (e.g., pp. 377, 390).

Toffler's solution is, among other things, doing futurism, a "conditioned ability to look ahead" (p.419) that helps us see where adaptation will be needed. How to adapt is a different problem, but Toffler lays out an intriguing solution in the form of what he calls "Anticipatory Democracy," which essentially amounts to localized, situated groupings of experts and non-experts, anyone who has a stake in and who is close to the issue at hand. It is through this decentralized, democratic investigation of the wicked problems that the future offers that adaptation is possible.

... and there are also some weirdly blasé sections about extramarital affairs, including how personalized AI can help us be better at them. So, the book is not totally without some oddities.