Rating: 5/5

This book has a truly terrible title. If ever there was a book to avoid based on the title alone it is this. I think the word ‘wedge’ has very little emotional or anticipatory resonance. You read this title and think to yourself ‘this will probably be awful’.

This is not an awful book, it is the very opposite of awful. Wonderful, is wonderful the opposite of awful?

The book is quite a short one again and it is firing on all cylinders from the very start. It's about a chapter in when it kicks off and once it does kick of it never slows down or lets you go until the very end. I ripped through this book because I could not bear to stop once it was going.

The suspense and pace never let up until the very end of the story. There are 2 main narratives within this book and both are solid. The mystery is a good one but does not try to be too clever and the suspense is the same. They are consistent in their logic and presentation and neither felt more important than the other one. 

One of the aspects of this book I enjoyed was the fact that rather than having one central character to obsess on it is a team piece. I found myself liking everyone in the team. There is a well handled group dynamic going on here. This is Hill St Blues before Hill St blues.

Why five stars then? Because the story is just so gripping. It's set in 2 key locations. This could almost be a play as it takes place over a single day but it is still brilliant. The twists and turns, the characters and their interplay are all deftly handled. It is tense and interesting and clever all at the same time. I was amazed at the amount of story I read in such a short book set over such a short period of time. If you come out of a book thinking to yourself ‘wow, that was amazing’ then what you have there is a 5 star book.

Also by the end of the book you get a moment where you realise what the title refers to and it almost redeems it. I am still not convinced it is a good title to pull readers into the series but it does at least make sense once you have finished the book.