Rating: 1/5

*Spoilers if you haven't read the book or seen the film*

I have two main complaints, one narrative-related and the other morality-related:

1. The book is touted as a suspenseful thriller. Yet every time my interest piqued as a reader ("Oooh, that subtle hint was interesting. What's going to happen now?!"), Grisham would take all the fun out of it by giving me a flipping VILLAIN CHAPTER, where the main evil lawyers meet in a back room to tell the reader exactly what just happened and what will happen next, sucking all the suspense--and therefore fun--out of the narrative. And anyway, Mitch was always about one million steps ahead of the evil lawyers during the ending "chase" scene, so I guess the purpose was not so much suspense as it was "be impressed with my really kickin' main character." But I very much was not impressed. (See #2.)

2. My working theory is that Grisham wanted Mitch to be a suburban James Bond: work your rear off in your super-competitive, high-paying job and still have time to run to keep up that college football star physique (oh yes and he was also top of his class), cheat on your wife in an exotic affair and get away with it entirely (she pouts about your schedule but deals with it while decorating the house and trying new recipes), outsmart the Mafia with ease and while you're at it steal their money because THAT's real moral, and other ridiculously over-the-top traits. He doesn't grow in any important way, which I know isn't necessary for the protagonist of an action thriller, but when he cheats on his wife after treating her like dirt for a while because he's working too hard to respect her wishes... I would like to see some growth in THAT case, at least. So, he's too "perfect"--or at least, perfect in a materialistic, superficial way that I really can't respect.

And the main reason I can't respect it is the sex. I'm not even talking about just the affair. I'm talking about the line "trying to kill each other" (an idiom used more than once, I believe) describing intimacy between a husband and wife. I'm talking about Mitch looking "lustfully" at his wife while she sleeps: lust is attraction to the forbidden, so how does this even work? 

As a result, Abby, who actually has some agency and grit in the film, is (in the book) reduced to nothing but a trophy wife for Mitch to save heroically, eye candy whose legs are constantly emphasized and whose hopes really don't matter: she waits around on Mitch, does whatever he says, and remains ignorant of his infidelity. Tammy, too--by far the most heroic character in this novel--has a very nice body, as we are constantly reminded. Does Grisham do this to women in every novel, or did he ever grow out of it?

And why make THAT the last line of the book? (For those of you who can't remember, Abby accidentally brushes a topic that might turn into an actual confession from Mitch, a chance for truth and a real relationship, and instead he flat-out lies to her. Then they go have sex. The end.) What possible purpose could there be in that ending? Was it an attempt at humor? How is that funny?! All it does for me is rub my hopes for their relationship in the mud. And the worst part is, the affair happened so much earlier in the book that I *could* have forgotten it if Grisham hadn't chosen to bring it up again in that beyond-obnoxious way. 

Ugh, just go watch the film.