Rating: 3/5

One afternoon, a woman named Virginia Dodge walks into the detectives' squad room in the 87th Precinct asking for Detective Steve Carella. When informed that Carella is out on a case, Mrs. Dodge announces that she will wait. She helps herself to a seat at a desk and when told that she must wait outside the squad room, she pulls a .38 from her purse and says that she's fine right where she is.

She forces the four detectives in the room to surrender their own weapons and announces that she's on a mission to kill Carella. Carella had arrested her husband who was then sent to prison and who has just died there. She blames Carella for his death and is determined to exact her revenge. When the detectives begin to circle around, she pulls a bottle from her purse and sets it on the desk. It's Nitroglycerine, she says, and if anyone comes closer, she will shoot the bottle and blow the entire precinct to hell and back.

The crisis plays out through a long afternoon and evening as each of the detectives speculates about whether there's really nitro in the bottle and about how they might outsmart Mrs. Dodge. Meanwhile, blissfully unaware, Steve Carella is investigating the apparent suicide of a very wealthy man whose body is discovered by the three sons who will inherit all his loot. 

It's a classic locked room mystery and there seems no way that the man's death could not have been a suicide. But Carella isn't satisfied, and until he is, he's not going to leave. Eventually, of course, he will have to wrap up his investigation and return to the squad room. Will it still be standing when he gets there? If so, will the grieving widow exact her revenge?

To my mind, this short novel is one of the weaker entries in the series. The only criminal investigation in the book is Carella's investigation of the apparent suicide, which is not all that exciting. The crisis in the squad room should be filled with tension, but it seems so implausible that I had a hard time taking it seriously.

Committed fans of the 87th Precinct will certainly want to read the book, but more casual crime fiction readers who want to sample the series have any number of better books from which to choose.