Rating: 4/5

I loved this book. This book belongs in the same category with the ones you can’t put down, and you curl in a corner, shaking with red eyes and a gaunt frame from malnutrition. Grisham developed the characters well and developed the plot with skill of a master storyteller. I noticed some similarities with Stephen King’s style, such as using a reference to the object with “the” instead of “a” (the “coffee table sat alone in the room,” “the man sat at the bar”), and he refers to people with nicknames, such as, for example, Collar-neck, or Red-nose (not used any books I’m aware of, just examples). King and Grisham had the same agent for a while, I believe, and used to be close, I’ve heard, so that makes sense.

 I appreciated the business humor in dialogues, and the sarcasm. Grisham writes great, down-to-earth dialogue that forms characters into real people. I laughed a lot with the dialogue. For example, the main character, Mitchell McDeere tells his wife she has to do all this stuff to hide from both the Mob and the FBI, run here, change this, do that. He tells her she needs to dye her hair blonde. Instead of freaking out or moving fast in anticipation of being murdered, she says, “Blonde!” This developed her character and made me laugh, made me feel like I knew her, like when you shake your head and smile about someone and say to yourself, “Abby,” with affection.

 If you don’t know the plot, or haven’t seen the movie or read the book:
 Mitchell McDeere comes out of law school top of his class, and he knows what he wants. He has drive. He lands in with a Firm with promises to make him abnormally rich, faster than usual, as long as he follows certain ethical rules (which I thought Grisham a brilliant writer; as a Christian he made a way around all the sexual and immoral craziness of that kind of lifestyle, a great example for my writing; I’m also a Christian). He ends up in a conspiracy between the Mob and the FBI, and becomes directly involved with both organizations at the same time. He fights to keep himself and his family alive. A smart guy, Mitch pulls a few brilliant stunts only a good lawyer could conjure.

 Grisham has earned a place on my favorite authors list. I want more! I just sold a few books of his to Half Price Books and when I realized I had got rid of them I about screamed. Off to Goodwill I go a-huntin’ again.