Rating: 4/5

There's something fascinating about reading a futurism book written 50 years ago. So much of it is either part of the accepted reality or obviously ridiculously wrong. 

Right: We're identified more by our careers than our employers, we struggle to adjust to change and it causes a lot of cognitive load, family structures are a lot more flexible.

Wrong: We're not colonizing the undersea, we appear to have dodged a lot of the worst of the eugenics, and education has tried some of those ideas and discarded them.

Just weird at this point: Command-and-control structures at work that prohibit peer-to-peer comms.

This book was very relevant to the book I'm writing right now, but none of us realized it until a co-author's dad said, "oh, you're writing the new version of Future Shock" and we were all confused, and then we read it, and we are, a bit. Then I asked _my_ dad if he had read it, and not only had he read it, but it was "one of the most influential books in his life" and we had some great conversations about it. So if you have a boomer dad you want to have a cool conversation with, ask him about this book, I guess?

It's full of really cool gems like this:
The day is already in sight when books, magazines, newspapers, films and other media will, like the Mustang, be offered to the consumer on a design-it-your-self basis. Thus in the mid-sixties, Joseph Naughton, a mathematician and computer specialist at the University of Pittsburgh, suggested a system that would store a consumer’s profile— data about his occupation and Interests— in a central computer. Machines would then scan newspapers, magazines, video tapes, films and other material, match them against the individual’s interest profile, and instantaneously notify him when something appears that concerns him. The system could be hitched to facsimile machines and TV transmitters that would actually display or print out the material in his own living room. By 1969 the Japanese daily Asahi Shimbun was publicly demonstrating a low cost “Telenews” system for printing newspapers in the home, and Matsushita Industries of Osaka was displaying a competitive system known as TV Fax (H). These are the first steps toward the newspaper of the future— a peculiar newspaper, indeed, offering no two viewer-readers the same content. Mass communication, under a system like this, is “de-massified.” We move from homogeneity to heterogeneity.

Toffler, Alvin. Future Shock (pp. 281-282). Random House Publishing Group. Kindle Edition. 

There's also this, which is culturally ancient, but relevant if you swap in "influencer" for "protester"
The college boy who chooses the Student Protester Model wastes little energy agonizing over whether to vote for Wallace, carry an attaché case, or invest in mutual funds. 

Toffler, Alvin. Future Shock (p. 315). Random House Publishing Group. Kindle Edition. 

The book is massive, and a little repetitive. I think an abridged version might not be the worst idea in the world, but Toffler was hugely influential through the 90s, and when you learn to see his fingerprints, it casts a lot of things into a new light. 

Read if: You want to talk to your boomer dad about change and how fast it happens, you want some interesting views of future-past.

Skip if: Eugenics, slightly weird race stuff, and the reflexive white male centerpoint are going to get right up your nose.

Also read: Drive by Daniel Pink