Rating: 1/5

This book irritated me a lot. I can definitely see the appeal, as it is usually fast paced and pretty exciting. I just could not buy into the setup of the book, and never once identified with the main character, Mitch McDeere. I felt like every single thing he did in the book, I would do differently.

The book starts out with Mitch getting a job offer to the relatively small law firm Bendini, Lambert, and Locke. The first 100 to 200 pages basically delve into what a champ Mitch is (college football star, genius lawyer at the top of his class, stellar work ethic), what a knockout his wife Abby is, and all the money he is going to be making with his new job. He works 18 hours per day, six days a week with his sights set on becoming a partner of the firm within 10 years or so. Then, one day, Mitch is approached by the FBI. It turns out his firm is an elaborate front put on by a Chicago based crime family. The rest of the book involves his adventures as he is followed by both the mob and FBI, as he tries to decide how to handle the situation.

I guess I didn’t really like this book because it focuses on all the wrong things. There are so many tedious descriptions of fancy BMWs, luxury restaurants, private jets…etc. It is supposed to lure the reader into the appeal and temptation of the firm, but somehow working 18 hours a day on tax law never made any of it seem worth it to me. So right off the bat, I was frustrated by the degree to which Mitch ignored his wife and all other aspects of life so that he could slave away for the firm.

Then the real kicker comes when Mitch cheats on his wife with some woman in the Cayman Islands. It’s revealed that it was all setup by the firm so that they could blackmail Mitch if need be. The problem is, the blackmail is never actually used, and basically never comes up again! So all it did was succeed in securing my hatred of Mitch, making all the subsequent plot developments and action less intense. In a book full of slimy criminal lawyers, it is not good that the main protagonist usually seems just as loathsome.

Overall, this seemed like a pretty standard legal thriller book. Good fun where you can check your brain at the door. It was marred by characters I hated and motivations that seemed silly to me. Not to mention some extremely clumsy dialogue. I guess I am being pretty hard on this book but it just had nothing in it that appealed to me whatsoever. Not my cup of tea!