Rating: 4/5

This was a fast read with a bit of a noir feel to it, and might be my favorite detective series. It is also my third time through which is why I have the whole series on my kindle. It is an old fashioned police procedural long before modern conveniences. The story line is tight with great pacing and is action driven as much as character driven. The characters are being fleshed out; and don't miss the fictional city of Isola described, in detail, as a woman all decked out for the pleasures of the night. The city is as much of a character as the detectives who inhabit the squadroom. 

There are two plots running concurrently but woven together seamlessly. In the first, Mrs. Frank Dodge a.k.a. Virginia Dodge silently enters the squadroom, asks for Detective Steve Carella; and when she finds out he is out on a case, pulls out a .38, points it at the detectives, and demands their guns. When they hesitate, she brings out a bottle of nitroglycerin and sets it down with the gun pointed at it. It is her wedge to get them to do as she says. She then explains she is there to kill Carella, because she blames him for her husband's death. Carilla made the collar when Frank was robbing a gas station and he was sent to Castleview prison where he died the day before. The three detectives, Cotton Hawes, Bert Kling, and Meyer Meyer plus lieutenant Brynes are the only ones present for awhile.

The second plot has Carella at the old Scott mansion investigating a locked door suicide. Old man Scott was found, by his three sons, hanging from the rafters of his study. Carella feels it doesn't smell like suicide, but can he prove his suspicions? The wealthy Scott had left $750,000 in cash plus the Scott Company and further holdings to be divided by his sons. Lots of possible suspects. The only problem being that the door was locked from the inside.

The tension escalates and the heat rises (pun intended) in the squadroom, and Virginia seethes. The detectives all plan stratagems to get that gun, but the thought always on their minds is - is the nitroglycerin real or is she playing them? What to do? Then, unaware of what's going on, Detective Hal Willis brings in a sassy Puerto Rican girl named Angelica for opening a guy's throat with a razor blade. More complications for Virginia.

And to make matters worse, Carella has asked his deaf mute wife Teddy to meet him in the precinct at 7:00pm so he can take her out to celebrate some very exciting news. The evening approaches, one officer is down, two have been pistol-whipped, and still no Carella. Virginia's nerves are on a thin edge. And in walks Teddy...

A small subplot involves Meyer Meyer surreptitiously filling out a fake DD report asking for help and secretly throwing it and two copies out the bars of the open window near his desk. We get to find out what happens to each sheet and a small glimpse into the life of who found it and what they did with it. There are a couple of twists and the ending is priceless concerning oblivious Carella's reaction when he enters the squadroom. Highly recommended series.