Rating: 4/5

Seven books into the 87th Precinct series and McBain throws in a very interesting curve ball. Instead of the usual scenario, with the detective squad investigating a few incidents, a lone woman, Virginia Dodge, walks into the 87th building, up the stairs to the detectives' desk area, takes a seat within that area, stating she's looking for Steve Carella, who happens to be out on a case. When politely asked to wait outside the area, she produces a .38 revolver and manages to completely take over the squad room! She threatens that she also possesses a bottle of Nitrogycerin that she's willing to explode, if the detectives fail to hand over their weapons. 

So, here's where I would have knocked my rating down to a 3; this bit of the plot stretches incredulity to the breaking point. No way, no how would a group of police detectives (seasoned to varying degrees, but none are rookies) agree to put up their weapons and become willing hostages. As soon as she produced the weapon, she would have been shot by any number of the cops, before she even had the chance to tell them about the nitro (forget the fact that she could have brought a weapon into the station so easily, but one must remember the times in which these stories are set). 

But, this story isn't really about whether or not it's believable. It's more of a fascinating one-act play of sorts-- how each of the detectives caught up in the squad room reacts, thinks, and behaves under these preposterous circumstances. Their gradual transition of emotion, from amusement, tolerance, all the way to pure hatred for this crazy woman is really where this book shines. The story is very short and moves at a rapid clip, so it doesn't really bog down where it easily might have. Oh, there's a few points where the reader is shifted outside the building, but for the most part, this story is more or less carried out in the thoughts of the cops and the eventually sadistic actions of Virginia. 

And that's why I moved it back up from a 3 star rating to 3.5 (forced to round up to 4 stars). No, it's not a true, full-blown 87th Precinct best of breed, but I found myself completely immersed and entertained, so much so, that I stayed up longer than usual to finish it in one day. Not my typical M.O., but then again, this isn't the typical M.O. for one of this series. I can accept both with pleasure.