Rating: 4/5

The book is divided into 6 parts. Part 1 introduces the basic program (death of permanence), Parts 2-4 explain the 3 factors that induce future shock: transience, novelty and diversity and Parts 5-6 bring in future shock and possibly coping strategies. For me, it was initially a very slow read, but for some reason it eventually took off into Part 3, and I found myself sold.

Toffler worries that we are hurtling towards mass feelings of "future shock" (akin to culture shock that travellers get when they go to a foreign country). The book serves as a tool for diagnosing the problem, i.e. why he thinks we'll be getting future shock, and also as a way of asking what we can do about it.

He makes some predictions (especially in the novelty section), and almost 40 years later, we see that he gets some of the wrong, at least for the time being. But that doesn't matter. It's just details, and for that matter, he himself says that although it's very easy to get things wrong, it is important to try looking into and anticipating the future.

Book is actually quite pro-technology and pro-change. Future shock comes because people today are experiencing too much change too fast. It's not that change is inherently bad, he says. Too little change and life is boring. But too much change, too much stimulation and we have trouble coping. And if you're worried about change, well there's a whole lot more of it coming right around the corner. 

(Key anticipatory rebuttal: it's important to plan for the long term, but that doesn't mean that plans have to be rigid. You may very well have to revise your 20 year plans from one year to the next, or more, but it's ok. Plan fluidly, but plan ahead)

Some of his proposals don't seem terribly realistic: the idea of post-technocratic planning sounds swell and all, but I don't see any nation, democratic or otherwise sitting itself down for 5 years (he's thinking War Games and future-jury duty), taking stock and asking where it wants to be. In any case, Toffler wants to get us thinking about how we can manage change and assure humanity a soft landing into the future.

Nice read. Kinda funny to see links with No Logo and The Paradox of Choice and maybe even Getting Things Done.