Rating: 5/5

Alvin Toffler has put a huge amount of work in this book. It is basically about change, and he analyzes it in almost every aspect. The book was written 40 years ago, discussing how change and technological developments are shaping the future and influencing our lives. Toffler received a lot of praise for his highly accurate predictions of the future. Indeed he does deserve the praise, however he deserves even more praise for his analysis of the subject. 

He revolves his discussion of change around three pillars: transience, novelty, and diversity. 1) Different aspects of life are becoming less permanent and more temporary (or transient), from the disposable products we use to the increased need for moving from city to city (for education or work), to changing the organizations where we work. This leads us to breaking up old relationships and creating new ones, moving from our old houses to new ones .. and so on. 2) Novelty increases unfamiliarity and hinders our ability to use past experience to judge the new situations we face. 3) The diversity of choice is expanding to the extent of overchoice. Toffler suggests that people follow certain lifestyles as a means to cope with the overchoice problem (I personally found this discussion very interesting and eye opening to people's behaviour ..) 

Toffler emphasizes the urge to think about the future and to think differently. People (governments, educationalists, businesses, societies, parents ..) tend to face new problems with old mentalities. Toffler argues that bureaucracy is slowly being replaced with ad-hocracy, standardization with customization, the individual is loosing his attachment to his organization (work place) and replacing it with an attachment to his profession. And, in my opinion, the most critical discussion is how people's values change as they cope with change. Toffler concludes the book with strategies for survival. He emphasized, among other things, the importance of tentative goals as well as the importance of feedback in a constantly changing world.

I dont claim to have covered the main points of the book. The book is crowded with concepts and arguments which have been approached from different angles. It is a mind stretcher and a thought provoker. A huge effort has been put into it, and the fact that it was written 40 years ago multiplies the amount of praise it deserves.