Rating: 4/5

Mitch McDeere is about to graduate third in his class from Harvard Law School. Now his goal is finding the best job with the most eye-watering salary and benefits that he can. So when he has secured not one but three offers from exclusive law firms in New York City and Chicago, he believes his future is on the fast track to success. Just the same, an offer from the small but lucrative firm of Bendini, Lambert &amp; Locke in Memphis, Tennessee has gotten him curious, so he agrees to an interview with the partners on a whim.

When he meets with them face-to-face just months before his graduation, the offer they make is truly a dream come true. Instead of having to wait years for the big money and amazing benefits, they’re offering everything right from the start. Granted, his follow up visit to the law firm’s headquarters gives both Mitch and his wife, Abby, somewhat of an uneasy feeling, but who could possibly walk away from this chance of a lifetime.

Once in town, the couple finds themselves living in a home they never thought they could afford so soon and driving a BMW that Mitch adores. But just as quickly as his life seems to be ticking off all of his desires, he’s approached by FBI Special Agent Wayne Tarrance. It seems that the firm Mitch has ensconced himself within is in the middle of a harrowing investigation that links his employer with none other than that of the Mafia.

Not exactly the gleaming pinnacle of ethics that he had hoped for, Mitch finds himself in a nightmare of his own making. Now the freshly minted, strait-laced attorney must pit his own smarts and principles against that of his bosses. He is not, however, the first to do this dance with the firm and the stakes couldn’t be higher. Chess move after chess move, Mitch must watch his own back. After all, if he’s not careful, he just might not make it out alive.

Having watched the movie adaptation of The Firm, which starred none other than Tom Cruise as Mitch McDeere, I generally knew what to expect from the book. What I was unprepared for, however, was the perfect plotting, convincing characters, and one thoroughly epic game of cat-and-mouse.

Starting at the top, I do have to say that while each of the characters were genuine and true-to-life, they were hardly engaging. Told in a round robin way via multiple, omniscient POVs, every perspective was covered. At the same time, though, it was delivered in a someway dry manner that kept me from really connecting with any of them along the way. Don’t get me wrong, I was rooting for Mitch and Abby every step of their journey, but their sense of desperation was missing just a tad.

What I absolutely loved, however, was the dynamite plot filled with one astounding twist after another. How Mitch could stay one step ahead of the game was beyond me, but I was fully invested just the same. Even better, I loved the fact that Grisham managed to explain the goings on without getting too bogged down in legal jargon or the extremely complicated illegal acts. Did I need to pay a bit more attention than I normally do in a thriller? Well, yes, but much of that was due to how fast-paced the whole book felt.

With dynamic, sharp writing that had me sitting beside Mitch in his office or getting off of a plane in the Caymans, it was imbued with palpable tension throughout. What really got me, though, was how downright plausible it all felt. A legal thriller that raced along with nary a courtroom in sight, my fingers flew as fast as they possibly could. And that climax! What can I say? I could almost hear the building tempo of the music playing around me.

There were some flies in the ointment, however. First off, it was obvious that this was written by a man in the very early 90s. With plenty of skirt chasing that included some rather sexist descriptions as well as an all too unenlightened view on race, the white, elite, Southern views rolled off of this one in spades. Granted, those were the kinds of individuals this plot centered around, but the book didn’t have to adopt them as well. I’m hoping that had it been written today, much of that would’ve been toned down. But then, you never really know, do you?

Secondly, while not a huge problem for me, the descriptions were often too long and with details that were unnecessary for the plot. Due to this, a good quarter of the over 400 pages could probably have been shaved off without damaging the storyline in the least. Did it greatly affect my opinion? No, not really, but I still found myself skimming here and there.

Ultimately, partly because a few things that were changed when it was adapted into a movie, I highly recommend reading this one before diving into the much anticipated sequel, The Exchange. A clever, original storyline packed with plenty of suspense, one gut-churning chase, and more mind games than you could ever imagine, I’m now eager to find out what Mitch has been up to for the last fifteen years. So while the movie is not one to be missed, I definitely suggest checking out the book first. After all, I, for one, had an absolute blast. Rating of 4 stars.

👉 Be sure to head to my Amazon Storefront to order. I get a small commission and would love your support!

Trigger warning: infidelity, sexism, racism, being roofied, organized crime, mention of: tax fraud, money laundering