Rating: 3/5

This book is still in print!

To me, that's pretty amazing. It seems that many readers would rather look at someone's views about our "now" or "near now, plus or minus", written four decades ago, than opening their eyes and looking for themselves.

If I still had the book, I might be tempted to see what these old views of our "now" could have been that seem so ... prescient? 

But I don't have it, got rid of it to make shelf space. 

I admit that I only think I ever read the book. Someone below left an outraged comment about that - as if, had I rated the book a 5 instead of a 3, and written an effusive review, it would have made earth-shaking difference. Not my ratings/reviews! Oh well.

At any rate, the cover of my edition said something about "run-away best seller". And it was, iirc.

It's funny how books about the future are always so popular, even though everyone knows, if they think about it, that no one, including authors of said books, has a crystal ball. And without that little appliance it's pretty hard to see into the future with much accuracy.

I suspect that if one could comb through all the "future-looking" books written in past decades, it might be found that the very few which exhibited pretty remarkable prescience would have been books that, when they were published, created either hardly a ripple, or else a backlash (see below **).

Mostly we like visions of the future which are quite like our own wishes for both our own, and society's, future. But human wishes have a rather poor record of being fulfilled.

I took a quick look through the book before giving it away (to BetterWorldBooks). Toffler talks about such things as people traveling more (sure he was right about that), economists being the same as always (another bingo), technology having either unforeseen consequences (right again) or very specific predicted consequences (not so good, those predictions) - lots of things like that.

Missing are things about the triumph of Mega-capitalism, the existential threat of global warming, a world whose ecosystems are on the point of collapse, a population which is overwhelming the capacity of the earth to support it - little things like that.

** Actually a lot of those were pretty much nailed by The Limits to Growth. But while that book did create a small stir when it was published just a couple years after Toffler's, it was mostly a lot of scoffing.

So goes the future prediction industry. Not one to invest in, as far as I'm concerned. After all, we seem to have enough trouble deciding what happened in the past.