Rating: 3/5

This is one of the messier Nero Wolfe stories. Stout never went where the noir writers like Hammet and Chandler did, but in Too Many Clients the plot centers on a sleazy rented room where a plastics executive, Thomas Yeager, has rendezvous with various women.

Rex Stout wasn't a writer who delved into that sort of grey area, and so the story stays topical with a sideways glance that is much less satisfying for a mature audience more comfortable with darker suspense. It's no surprise that when Stout tackles tries his hand at it that it falls flat.

When Yeager turns up dead, Archie works with Fred Durkin to capture Yeager's adventurous women as they try to sneak back to Yeager’s lair and gather embarrassing evidence. These 'naughty' girls are bundled up, held at gunpoint and, in one case, abused by an angry husband. Mr and Mrs Austin Hough have a marital problem. Mr Hough knows he can't satisfy his wife's sexual desires and he knows she's finding satisfaction elsewhere. It seems like a tolerable arrangement until he decides it's time to confront her and punish her -- when that happens, Archie briefly offers help, but ultimately the problem ends with a shrug.

The eye was swollen shut, and the swollen cheek and jaw were the color of freshly sliced calves' liver.

Archie's reaction is nothing like what Marlowe’s would be:

I told him to send [champagne] to Mr. Austin Hough ... and enclose a card...: "With the compliments of Archie Goodwin." Preferring to make it a personal matter, I didn't put it on expense. I have often wondered whether he dumped it in the garbage, or drank it himself, or shared it with her.

This light treatment is what makes Too Many Clients bland. Instead, its strengths are a tangle of private eye tropes: tailing suspects, blackmailers, and corporate politics. Meanwhile Nero Wolf juggles multiple clients to earn his pay and keep the innocent under his protection -- a Nero Wolfe plot device that is not new to the series, but appropriate for this story and its title.

Things were looking up, but it was getting a little complicated. At 4:30 yesterday afternoon we had had no client and no prospect of any. Then one had come but had turned out to be a phony. Then Mrs. Perez had dangled a hundred bucks and perhaps more. Now this customer was offering a grand. I was digging up clients all right, but too many clients can be worse than too few.

We were now out about five Cs on the Yeager operation, and we had four clients and two bucks in retainers, plus a damn good chance of ending up in the coop for obstructing justice.

Stout reminds us that means, opportunity, and motive are key to crime solving. Without these, the best option is to go fishing: catch somebody in a lie. Wolfe is no stranger to bluffing.

When I first asked that question, had you a motive, I knew nothing about it, but I do now.

... and I might have blundered fatally. I pried it out of her by a ruse. I had cause to suspect she was there Sunday evening, but nothing that could be used as a lever on her, so I fabricated one.

Too Many Clients leans heavily on Stout's favorite device of Wolfe bluffing his way to the truth. Key clues happen off-screen, outside of Archie's knowledge until the reveal itself. Stout was more interested in Archie as a flirt than Yeager as a swinger, or Maria Perez as a voyeur. The effect is like watching a shell game where you keep picking the wrong card long after losing interest in looking for it. Plot device takes precedence over darker themes left unexplored.