Rating: 1/5

*some plot points may be spoiled so beware*

Ever heard when snobs call romance novels nothing more but wish fulfilment for women? Well I present you with a wish fulfillment for a young to middle age men! 

How do I know that? Well we have a very young guy who just finished university who acts chill and super confident in the situations that will make everyone except for trained spy sweat. And he has a super hot supermodel looking wife who is always horny for her husband and also an elementary school teacher! But you’ll hear about her sexy legs a lot, be prepared. There is this big plot point where Mitch goes away for three minutes and cheats on her. Why? At least make her a nagging shrill of a wife. What are you afraid of, Grisham? Oh, I remember, this is wish fulfillment. We cannot have non-bangable wives here. 

The part where the law firm hires only ugly women so men will not be tempted, you can judge for yourself. It’s too easy a target.

Now when s*it got real and Mitch needed to escape how do you think his wife reacted? Did she say “come on, Mitch, I have a life and job and family and friends here. I cannot disappear. “? WRONG! This is wish fulfillment, remember! Wife has all that stuff but just to fill her day between waiting for her darling or asking when he will be home. Of course she is totally fine with that plan. And finding out your house is bugged? No big deal!

BTW the proof that this book was not written with me in mind was in the scene when Mitch comes home. He cheated, he is afraid of being caught. And there is an envelope for his wife!! Our blood runs cold, heart skips a beat. Are these THE photos?? But then his wife said - “ah, no, just some empty envelope was delivered.” I always don't recycle them but lay down for my husband to see them. When I was reading this scene I imagined countless men reading this chapter and thinking about their wives and mistresses and being frightened vicariously through Mitch. 

The only character worth discussing here is Mitch. Others are just “basic guy” type, “ugly women” type and “hot women” type. Nothing more can be said about them.
So Mitch. Mitch is a big piece of poop. He cheated. When everything went south he made his wife his minion (she did a lot of risky work for him and he kinda was chill about it), he still did not tell her about cheating and risked her life. He also had her cornered into forgiving him and not leaving (well if she finds out when they were on the run and she was without her support or job then what she’s gonna do?). Also his brother Ray is important but her parents. Who cares about them. But don't worry, in the end the wife did not find out about cheating and Mitch lived happily ever after with zero consequences but with a lot of stolen money. 
And in the last sentence of the book he has sex on the beach (not a drink).

And the thriller part was just not very thrilling and also nothing was realistic ( FBI boss meeting with our guy in some dark alley, telling him that he, the top manager of a huge bureaucratic machine that is FBI, will personally wire to some dingy bank 2 millions without the IRS knowing, all the getting Ray out of jail bs was just laughable. And omg FBI are a bunch of incompetent goons). This is the most basic Michael Douglas-starring type of thrillers.