Rating: 5/5

Blending my love of series with my love of rereads - let’s chat about THE FIRM by JOHN GRISHAM.

The first time I read this was back in the 90s. (Which feels so 10 minutes ago, but I digress!) It was my gateway book into the world of GRISHAM. If you keep swiping you can see my well-loved, well-read original mass market paperback. I’ve since thrifted this First Edition and am so happy to have it in my collection. 

THE FIRM opened my eyes to legal thrillers and I read it obsessively - pulled in by the writing and the story. I was living in my first apartment and can vividly remember reading it on my commute on the T and during some downtime at my on-campus summer job 🤫 

I promptly binged my way through more GRISHAM and went down a legal thriller rabbit hole while I waited for a new release. When I talk about pivotal books I tend to talk about A TIME TO KILL, but truth is I read THE FIRM first so this is really when my book-changing moment happened.

My first read for Series September was a nostalgic one and I have to say it totally holds up. I did a mix of reading + audiobook (both great!). I’m so excited for THE EXCHANGE to see what Mitch McDeere is up to these days!

In case you’re not familiar with this one here’s a quick synopsis:

Mitch McDeere was top of his class at Harvard Law. He had his choice of the best firms in America. He made a deadly mistake when he chose Bendini, Lambert &amp; Locke.

It was an offer Mitch McDeere couldn’t refuse: a position at a law firm where the bucks, billable hours, and benefits are over the top. It’s a dream job for an up-and-comer—if he can overlook the uneasy feeling he gets at the office. If he can ignore the portraits on the wall honoring the lawyers from the firm who have died in a string of accidents. If he can find a way to stay on top of his work and his marriage.

Then an FBI investigation into the firm’s connections to the Mafia plunges the straight and narrow attorney into a nightmare of terror and intrigue. He has no choice but to pit his wits, ethics, and legal skills against the firm’s deadly secrets—if he hopes to stay alive.