Rating: 2/5

I wonder how many pages Grisham could have shaved off this excessively long thriller if he had cut some of the descriptions the characters' cars, the outfits of FBI agents and Mafia goons disguised as tourists at tropical locations and every single female character's physique.

The book starts out promising a light but thrilling ride along Mitchell McDeere, a newly-graduated 'Harvard man' who is shopping for jobs around the US' best law firms. He is not only 'young and hungry', but also absolutely brilliant, incredibly handsome, and has a pretty young wife with stunning legs. He decides to settle at a small and unknown law firm in Memphis, ignoring offers from big-shot firms in New York, after they offer him everything he's ever wanted: money. Oh, and a Mercedes, a brand new house, free holidays in the Caribbean, and did I mention the Mercedes? 
Somehow, the genius Mitch does not doubt for a second that there might be something fishy going on behind the surface ... until he's contacted by the FBI. Cue the next 200+ pages of dramatic chases around t-shirt shops in the Caymans and Korean shoe stores in Memphis, many thousands of photocopies and hotel rooms.

A big thing that irked me about the novel was, as is often the case, the length. Good writers have the talent of keeping you engaged at least 90% of the time - great writers know when they have said all there is to say about the story and it's time to wrap up gracefully. I think Grisham missed the mark on this one. Coupled with dubious stylistic choices (repetitive dialogue and expressions, limited vocabulary, excessive descriptions of cars and other material objects), the book became hard to get through around page 300 or so.
But even beyond that, the content of the story becomes increasingly unlikely and unrealistic, and characters remain barely fleshed out until the very end. Even when there are chances to develop them beyond surface level, Grisham prefers to concentrate on their tans, their stockings, their lips and bums than to delve on their personalities, rendering them completely forgettable at best and deeply unsympathetic at worst. The reader is never given a chance to empathize with their struggles, motivations and objectives.

Personally though, one of the elements that really put me off the most was Grisham's disturbing and unnecessary use of lewd references to women's bodies throughout the novel. Women in this book, even the few that are named, seem to serve as nothing but scenery in Mitch and the other men's incessant pursuit for money and success. There are the 'fat and ugly' secretaries, the 'bitch' former attorney at the firm; there are the 'string bikinis' at the beach and the 'native pros' with their breasts hanging out at the Caymans. There are the black women who cook greasy meals (or should learn to do so; there is a memorable passage where the narrator laments Cayman women's inability to fry chicken 'even though they are black'). There is Mitch's sidekick Tammy, whose brave deeds to help Mitch are overshadowed by obsessive descriptions of her 'sticky lips', her high heels, her breasts, her toenail polish and derriere. And, finally, there's Abby, Mitch's trophy wife, perhaps the book's greatest missed chance and disappointment.

I understand this book was written in the '90s, that it was a different time with different sensibilities, but Grisham's complete disregard for women as actual people with wishes and desires and needs going beyond men's sexual satisfaction, a litter of kids and a nice kitchen was not okay then as it is not now. It's tasteless, lazy writing and downright offensive at times. 
The book is okay if you have patience and not much else to do. Wouldn't recommend it though.