Rating: 4/5

A good starting point for thinking about Confucius is that he was concerned with training rulers and subjects. This puts him in the company of the Sophists of Plato’s dialogues. Protagoras and Socrates begin their debate over the question of whether good citizenship can be taught, and consequently whether Sophists like Protagoras can be useful to that end. 

For Confucius, there is no distinction between the ethical and the political, because the political virtue of social stability relies upon the ethical foundations of self-mastery, self-knowledge, benevolence, wisdom, filial piety, adherence to tradition, and a disposition towards lifelong learning. The state is constituted by clans, households, and individuals, all coming together to form an organic whole. Ethical turpitude among the people undermines the foundations of political order, like termites infesting a house. 

His fondness in recounting the deeds of wise rulers reminded me a little of Machiavelli as well; but whereas Machiavelli, as the first Western modernist, subordinated ethical considerations to the utilitarian concerns of political expediency, Confucius rightly regards morality as the aim of social and political life. While the two shared a desire for what we would now call civic virtue, or the notion that successful government relies upon a virtuous citizenry, they entertained remarkably different ideas on the nature of virtue. For Machiavelli, the virtuous have an agile and flexible mind, machismo, daring, and a perceptiveness that allows them to see the potential in chaos. Confucius’s virtue is almost the inverse of that; to be moral, for him, is to be in such a condition that the Machiavellian virtues are regarded only as the virtues of brigands. 

I find the comparison between them fascinating, because in the great ethical teacher of China and the forefather of modern Western republicanism, you find the seeds of two great cultures, which in our time can either be adversaries or can learn from one another for their mutual benefit.