Rating: 4/5

There are two things that are commonly labeled ‘philosophy’. The first is philosophy sensu strictu, which deals with technical problems in its various branches, such as epistemology, metaphysics, ethics, etc. The other is what one could call a “philosophy of life”, a vague category that one encounters in religious texts, works of literature, poetry, and also intermingled with formal philosophy. Confucianism, insofar as I understand it, mostly falls into the latter category.
		
The Analects mainly takes the form of aphorisms that are interspersed in conversation between Confucius and his various disciples. I suppose the closest parallel I can think of would be Marcus Aurelius’s Meditations, although at times the Analects reads more like the Gospels. There are some fine maxims in here, but also many sections that are alternately baffling or boring. Why must I wade through descriptions of ‘the Master’s’ clothing style? There is no narrative or didactic drive to the book; it just floats along from parable to aphorism, with no apparent connection. If there were not some interesting quotes, it would be a very dry read.
		
If I were asked to shoehorn Confucius’s thinking into Western philosophy, I would say that he is propounding a form of virtue ethics, with a special emphasis on social life. Although the final goal is to become a ‘superior man’, this is accomplished through the fulfillment of various duties, in accordance with custom and etiquette. Propriety is key here. If it is considered proper to do something, one should do it (provided that it does not conflict with basic morality). This will seem very strange and perhaps servile to some modern readers, I expect, but I can see the logical kernel behind this idea. Abiding by custom and performing social rituals could have the effect of realigning one’s own personal interests with the interests of the community, leading to more harmonious social relationships.
		
I especially appreciate Confucius’s emphasis on action instead of speculation. A person can be the world’s foremost expert on Kantian and utilitarian ethics and still be a serial killer. But, be that as it may, I would have appreciated a more focused, more organized, and more didactic treatment. In Western works, the reasons for accepting arguments are usually made very explicit. In this book, by contrast, the maxims appeal more for their apparent prudence and wisdom than from the weight of reasoning. Still, I do appreciate the way that the lessons are put forward, because they beg the reader to figure out the reasoning behind the arguments for themselves, rather than being spoon-fed by the author.
		
For a book that I found rather dull when I was working through it, I have spent a lot of time thinking about its contents afterwards. So kudos to you, Confucius, your reputation is well-deserved.