Rating: 5/5

“We each owe a death, there are no exceptions, I know that, but sometimes, oh God, the Green Mile is so long.”

Stephen King can write. Capital-W write. In that trademark way of his that has me stay up for half of the night — at age 16 and 38 alike — just so that I can finish his story, sleep be damned. It’s that strange spellbinding storytelling magic he’s so good at. 

And this is King at his best, on the level of “Shawshank” and “The Body”.

 

The Green Mile is a quieter King, the one who knows the power of subtle unease and the strength of understated stories that are at their core just about life. It’s a King that can break your heart so easily and leave both teenage and adult me slowly blinking off that inconvenient moisture in my eyes while trying to pretend that it’s all fine, man, all good. It’s a King that catches you with emotion and sadness and then with seeming casualness gut punches you. And it’s great. Cruel but great.

  “Time takes it all, whether you want it to or not. Time takes it all, time bears it away, and in the end there is only darkness. Sometimes we find others in that darkness, and sometimes we lose them there again.”

King is perfect yet again. The characters - easily drawn and actually human, both good ones and the slimy little shits. The easy and completely natural dialogue with good ear for actual quirks in speech; the dialogue that sounds real, like it should be spoken rather that stuffily written. The slice of life moments that never feel overlong despite the leisurely pace. The beauty of strangest moments and the slow creepiness of others. The things that stay with you when you are at the end of your own Green Mile - the mix of regrets and loveliness and kindness and pain that’s life.

 

One moment he has me pondering along with his protagonist Paul Edgecombe, a death row prison guard in the 1930s South when he comes across something strange and wonderful and also awful, “Sometimes there is absolutely no difference at all between salvation and damnation.” And the next moment he has me admire through chuckles his ability to cunningly turn a phrase in such a way that it’s both precise and funny and weirdly memorable (“During that time I didn’t dare fart sideways, let alone take a day off to investigate the idea I’d gotten at my kitchen table on the morning after all the upheavals.”) Fart sideways indeed. 

He’s good. He’s got me under his spell for life.

King will always be among my favorite writers, and honestly, one of the best writers of our time, and it’s pointless to try to convince me otherwise.

5 stars.

—————
Buddy read with Dennis.