Rating: 2/5

I hate to say this but I think Neruda is a little heavy handed with words. He uses tons, he uses a whole freaking mountain worth of words and then some – homeboy can throw down some words. The man goes on and on, he makes every sentence obese with words, and more words. He’s a poet for Christ sake, isn’t he suppose to be all sparing with the words? What happened? Those guys usually just write a couple-a-fragmented-sentences and then call it a day, go drink some red wine, moan about the injustice of it all. And what’s the deal with the attention-deficit-disorder-jump-around-short-attention-span-can’t-keep-on-the-same-subject-for-more-that-six-pages thing? I’ve had more linear conversations with actively using crackheads.

“Ah, the poets, the poets. There’s Juan Carlos el Topo del Norte, one of the finest poets the world has ever known. Too bad his words were never written down and published. That woman is looking at me, she wants me, of course she wants me. I’ll make love to her now. I need to go to Paris. Ah, the mountains, the forest, the land of my youth. It’s winter in France, where are my pants? Don Chi Chi del Pinnochi comes into my room, says you must try this woman, please, yes, I will try this woman, serve her to me like a side of Argentinean beef on a silver platter. She is magnificent, like no other, we both take her, we both agree, like no other we say – then we lose her in a taxicab. Oh, I’m an ambassador to Guam. There is a woman there that wants me, I know this, her beauty is like the poem I published in my book Pedacitos Poéticos Squirmy. Franco, what pain he cause his country. Where’s my ambassador salary? Look it’s Gandhi! The Fascists are in Germany. Are we there yet? She wants me, yes, yes she does. I Think I married her, we lived together for years. I was not at the consulate in Buenos Aires long. Barcelona. Oh, the poets, the poets…”

Maybe it’s the translation. You can blame a lot on those insufferable translators. Yet what could anyone do with a couple of lines like this: “Girls of various colorings visited my campaign cot, leaving no record but the lightning spasm of the flesh. My body was a lonely bonfire burning night and day on that tropical coast.” (page 99)

Ouch! Ick! Smoking sex machine, eh? Pablo just never stops, he’s sort of full of himself, sort of. I admire his ego, his stamina, his gall - although I had to fight the urge to take a shower between chapters – but I got tired of it really, really quick. That and the incessant name-dropping, the obscure references to published work, his and others, and the words. Too many words, man. Too many words.

There is one scene/passage, it starts right after that horrid “lonely bonfire burning night and day on the tropical coast” line (middle of page 99 – 100). Where Pablo beds/forces a Tamil woman, who cleans out his shit pail every morning, to have sex with him. He goes on about her beauty, he compares her to a sculpture, and when they have sex he states: “It was the coming together of a man and a statue.” Ooooh, nice. Then he writes: “She kept her eyes wide open all the while, completely unresponsive. She was right to despise me. The experience was never repeated.” 

Right when I was about to toss the book across the room, for the fifth time I might add, Neruda goes and lets me see that he knows he’s a womanizing self centered egomaniac. She’s stiff as a statue, unresponsive to his machismo, submissive, because she was born into the pariah caste. She let him have his way, but she isn’t into it or him. Even Pablo, or Pablo’s ego actually, can grasp that she’s not interested. I know, no big revelation here, except, for a second I’m thinking maybe old Pablo really didn’t hold himself in such high regard as it appears he did – that it’s all mainly bravado, and he knows it. 

Then I threw the book across the room.

However:

“placid lakes, high up in the mountains, like eyes forgotten by wasteful gods.” (pg.155)

Is such a lethargically beautiful image.

“it was easier to pull a Mexican’s tooth then wrest his beloved gun from him.” (pg.157)

This guy kills me.

Yet I totally must admit the style, the language, and the pace, of the book is what really drove me insane. The truth is these days I want a little methamphetamine drive prose, just a little – too much and I’m shot to the curb, rubbing my eyes, wanting to go to sleep. David Sedaris, has just the right amount of ADD to keep the pace flowing and my interest engaged. Denis Johnson can get vague and wander a little bit. Ok, a lot. But when I’m reading one of his books I’m not looking at the map trying to figure out where he turned left and somehow we ended up in Winnemucca – he pointed me in that direction a long time ago, we’ve just made a few hundred stops along the way. Gabriel Garcia Marquez’s incredible memoir: Vivir Para Contarla (Living to Tell the Tale), while highly poetic and prose driven, managed to get me from point A to point B, in one smooth linear motion. And Marquez, sexist as he was/is, didn’t leave me with a queasy porno booth voyeur feeling – and besides, he’s freakin Gabriel Garcia Marquez, 100 years of Solitude man! Mary Karr composed the most beautiful dysfunctional memoir ever written and when I was done I wanted more, read Cherry, still wanted more – addictive she is. 

I had no preconceived notion as to what to expect from Neruda, I was interested, I was intrigued, I’ve never knowingly read his poetry, but I certainly knew who he was and have nothing but respect for the man and his politics – and still I found him hard to read. Perhaps he was a tad unleashed with the prospect of just writing about himself? I mean, I know the feeling. I’m so self-absorbed that’s all I write about – me, me, bloody me! Have I gone off the subject yet? Is this Winnemucca?

Did I mention there were too many words?