Rating: 4/5

A few years ago the Broadway musical “Wicked” came to Nashville and my family and I went to experience this production at the Tennessee Performing Arts Theater. I have actually seen a musical on Broadway (Rock of Ages) and I was impressed. But this was something else entirely. I was awestruck by the talent: the singing, the acting, the stage production. As you may imagine, this was not my usual forte. Oh, I can walk across a room and avoid dragging my knuckles (most days) but for the most part a presentation of this sort is beyond me; but I can at least acknowledge the virtuosity of a performance, even if it is not in a medium to which I am normally accustomed.

Spy novels, likewise, are not in a genre to which I am inclined. Nonetheless, I know when I see greatness and this must certainly be, like Graham Greene stated, the best spy novel I’ve ever read.

First of all, I was astounded by Le Carre’s mastery of prose language.

“They walked to her flat through the rain and they might have been anywhere – Berlin, London, any town where paving stones turn to lakes of light in the evening rain, and the traffic shuffles despondently through wet streets.”

Le Carre delivers this level of artistry in page after page of prose reminiscent of Graham Greene, or obliquely, like Malcolm Lowry. This is simply a very well written book.

Add to that the psychological depth and the labyrinthine twists and turns of the interactions between east and west operatives and there is little doubt why this novel has collected such accolades. A book that rises above its labeled genre and becomes simply a brilliant story. Le Carre could have described competing stationary merchants and this would have been interesting.

Most impressive is that Le Carre eschews convention, deliberately rejects Hollywood sentimentality and tells this straight. He makes his case as it should be, as it must be.

Bravo.

** 2018 - My wife and I visited Berlin this year and went to Checkpoint Charlie, it was kind of surreal. Beautiful city BTW.