Rating: 5/5

4.5 to 5.0 stars. Okay to begin this review I want to point out that, except for a number of Tom Clancy novels, I have only read a handful of spy thrillers so what impressed me about this book may be pretty typical stuff in the better works of the genre. Also, I have not seen the movie adaptation based and knew nothing about the plot coming in (a condition I highly recommend if you have the chance). 

With that introduction made, I LOVED THIS BOOK. For a book published in 1963, once you get past some obvious anachronisms (e.g., the Berlin wall, who the bad guy are, the sense of optimism that the world may not be totally fucked....sorry couldn't resist...), the book did not feel dated at all. I was absolutely captivated from the opening scene to the incredible ending and I highly recommend this book. 

The plot deals with a British case officer working in West Berlin who, after losing his last agent operating in East Berlin, returns to London and contemplates retirement. However, his superiors have one last assignment for him and one for which his current state of mind is ideal for. They want him to “defect” and set up his nemesis in the end game of a plan that has been in the works for years. All of this takes place at the very beginning of the novel so I don’t think I am giving away any spoilers. 

From here, this tightly woven, brilliantly executed plot moves at an incredibly fast pace and is filled with superb twists, amazing dialogue and great characters, all of which blur the lines between good and bad. In fact, one of the most impressive aspects of the novel is the way it portrays the world of espionage as being a world filled with “grey” people doing often immoral things but for what they consider "the greater good." This aspect of espionage work has always intrigued me and I have never come across a book that portrays this better. 

Bottom-line, this was a great read that packed a very enjoyable, detailed story in its slim, svelte 224 pages. HIGHLY RECOMMENDED!!

One final note: I listened to the audio version of this book read by Frank Muller (one of my favorite narrators who tragically passed away a few years ago) and thought he did a superb job and added to the enjoyment of the story.