Rating: 4/5

Fleming gave it a glamorous touch, Ludlum bought added thrills, but le Carré writes of espionage with a cold starkness that is far more believable and all the better for it. There are no car chases, gadgets, tuxedos, martini's, or large breasted women walking out of the ocean throwing their long locks back over their pretty faces. This is so far away from the exotic travels of 007, mainly taking in the sights of airports, road checkpoints, chilly rooms and deserted streets, le Carré shows a Europe lingering in the darkness of the cold war, and paints a grey and gloomy picture of just about everyone involved, the pacing in slow but very intelligent in it's full bodied descriptions of life as a spy, and sadly for those involved this is a dull and rather empty existence, where they give up so much for Queen and country, but have little to show for it. It's a boring way to make a living, but someone has to do it right?.
o
Events unfold with Burnt out British spy Alec Leamas returning to London after complications regarding an operation in Berlin, and is then seemingly hung out to dry by the agency. Cut adrift he turns to the bottle and tries to make some sort of a normal life for himself, with little funds he takes a job in a library, befriends a fellow worker called Liz, and they strike up an affection for each other. Paranoid, always glancing over his shoulder, he gets the sense of being followed, and here it conjures up images of shady looking individuals, with turned up collars on their dark coloured macs walking through fog, sounding echos coming from footsteps on wet tarmac, yes it really is this way. And after agreeing to return to Germany with other figures of intelligence he appears to turn defector through a friendly interrogation to his previous work, giving up names, banks, phoney passports and members of his organization whilst stationed in East Germany. But of course with this type of setting, nothing is as it it seems, there may or may not be, double crossings, set-ups, and lies within our midst!

On the surface the story is pretty basic and easy to follow, but deep within this novel there is so much more going on, that not always makes a whole lot of sense, it's not a case of joining all the dots at the end, although you can look at it this way, it's the taut and murky characters that really get you thinking, how you interpret their actions, and just what is going on behind the scenes, because sometimes it's not so much what's written in front of you, but where this world exists off the pages that truly makes for an authentic reading experience.
Graham Greene quotes it as the best spy novel ever written, who am I to argue.