Rating: 5/5

This is the novel that placed John Le Carré firmly on the path of fame and fortune. It was his breakthrough novel and 50 years later he was still telling people it had nothing to do with his previous job in the Secret Service; that it was a figment of his imagination only; that had it been based on any facts whatsoever, it would never have been allowed into publication.

None of that registered at the time with the media and critics. And those old rumours still hang in shabby tatters to this day. The consensus was that if John Le Carré protested its validity, it was only to save face for the Secret Service. In his 10-page Foreword to this novel, he said that his job involved information gathering and he didn’t do it all that well because even then his imagination got in the way. He also said that where the world saw a spy who became a writer, the reality is that he was always a writer first and happened to be in the spy business – on a low rung of the ladder – until he could manage to get by on his writing.

I believe him. Not because his spy novels aren’t first-rate; they are. And maybe I might not have been so quick to believe him 50 years ago; I may not have. I do believe him now, though, and if you read the Foreward, you will likely believe him, too.

This novel is the first one that details an actual operation. George Smiley plays a peripheral role as most of the story revolves around Alec Leamas. Another one of his people has been killed and he is getting tired of it. Mundt, who also featured as the “bad guy” in a previous novel, is the one who set it up so Alec gets behind the idea generated by Headquarters of an elaborate sting operation behind the Iron Curtain to eliminate Mundt.

The pace of this novel is fast – very fast. The action moves swiftly through the prep work for the operation and as Alec sinks deeper into the role he needs to play it is sometimes hard to tell when he is the ‘real’ Alec Leamas and when he is the ‘character’ playing a pivotal role in the operation. He is just that good. During the race to complete the mission before something goes too far awry, sometimes the bad guys aren’t the worst guys, and sometimes the worst guys are better than they seem. Or are they?

It’s a topsy turvy world, this spy business, and this book has it all. The ending could have been happier, and I probably would have written it a bit differently. However, no-one asked me to, and I bow to John Le Carré’s superior skill in writing a fitting ending for a heart-racing, heartbreaking spy novel.