Rating: 4/5

The short story “A Vendetta” is a thriller/ dark short story written by Guy de Maupassant in the 1800’s. At first glance, the title stood out to me the most. It did not give away the genre of the story which made me read to find out. It grabbed my attention and made me read more. I have always liked a thriller story and after reading the first few paragraphs I understood why. 
“A Vendetta” clearly illustrates the theme of grief and nails what revenge feels like. The story opens with a background of the old widow mother named Saverini who lives in a small town looking over a river in Italy with her young son, Antoine and his dog, Semillante which the mother describes as a “big, thin beast”. The story shows that the house is “clinging” onto the edge of the cliff overlooking the river with “deadly straits” that describe the landscaping. Maupassant also says that the houses “look like the nests of wild birds” which suggested to me that the tone is threatening and that the author deliberately creates a scary and eerie atmosphere in the beginning paragraphs.
One night after being out and stepping into a brawl, Antoine was stabbed by a man named Nicolas Ravolati. After leaving his lifeless body on the cobble stoned ground, Nicolas escapes to his house past the river. When seeing Antoine’s body, his very old mother did not cry but instead promised him a vendetta as her wrinkled hand is on his body with the dog howling beside her. To make matters worse, the widow had no one since she lived alone. She had no family to comfort her, and the neighbors were unsympathetic.
What happens from that horrific opening is a tense trauma, in which Saverini finds a way to move past her sons death. Still on the loose, Nicolas was never charged with murder and escaped perfectly, or so he thought. The environment that Saverini lives in is dangerous since they never searched or found Nicolas. For months after, Maupassant explains how Saverini used the dog to symbolize her pain and suffering while she is grieving her son by not feeding the dog and training him for the unimaginable. She was holding rituals for Semillante, and every three days would feed him a perfectly cooked black sausage after days of harsh training. The dog would froth from the mouth and have its eyes fixated on the one sausage until he was able to eat it. Saverini would have him chained to a homemade kennel and would refer to Semillante as a “beast”.
Maupassant illustrates that for the next three months, Saverini all alone, all day long sitting at her window, she was looking out over the river thinking of a revenge plan. As an older woman who is too old to complete her son’s vendetta that she promised him, she needed to get creative for her revenge. I found this intriguing since she was so determined as an older woman and never gave up on her promise. The author says, “She no longer slept and night; she had neither rest nor peace of mind; she thought persistently” which tells me that she has been spending every waking moment trying to find Nicolas and make him pay for what he did. I believe Salverini saw the vendetta as an honor code, meaning the family would be shamed or dishonored if she did not take vengeance against Nicolas. 
Maupassant’s story brings to life that as long as people have existed, they have wronged each other. Those who have been done wrong tend to seek revenge and feel as though they must gain it to feel relief. Revenge is sometimes on social media or even in schools between two friends. For example, after a relationship has ended badly, one person posts on social media spreading rumors about the other that had cheated on him. Revenge can be seen anywhere. “A Vendetta” gave me a stronger appreciation for thriller stories since I never know what will happen next. It gave me a better understanding and helped me be creative with how I think the story would have ended. Additionally, I am impressed with the story and am confident in saying that I have a greater appreciation for thriller stories.