Rating: 1/5

This is the story of the Iliad, retold by Colleen McCulough, one of the big and most meticulous historical fiction writers around.

However, this book fails to live up the the usual McCulough expectations. Her research is meticulous, as usual; she's clearly read the Iliad, dug into the history of ancient Greece, etc', but somehow, unlike in her vast and significantly superior Masters of Rome series, she fails to engage.

Her problems in this book are threefold:

She strikes a poor balance between revisionism of classical tects, and the retention thereof - she tried her best to stick to the story of the Iliad but, for several reasons which will be partially discussed further down, fails to stick to the characterizations it provides, and has to go to great lengths to bring forth reasons and explanations for things that happened.

She tends to admire people far too strongly - this is a problem which appears to be typical of McCulough. Her adoration for a specific 'hero' or personage blinds her to everything else. She picks out her 'favourite', and everything concerning him spirals downward from there. In the Masters of Rome books her golden boy is Caesar, the man of no flaws; she subjects his enemies to deterioration of character not indicated by any of the ancient sources - Cicero is a coward and egotistical; Brutus is a weakling, Lucullus had too many 'shrooms...

In the Song of Troy, her darling is Achilles, for which reason she chooses - wrongly,I think, to represent him as a warrior poet perfect in his virtues in all way but his rage. She chooses to disregard what the Iliad puts forth as a petty, rather selfish character, and to explain his behaviour in line with the Iliad's actual text, she has to create convoluted, albeit fascinating, ploys.

Just as she loves Achilles in particular, she sides with the Greeks in general. There are foolish Greeks, but there are also wise, insightful and clever Greeks. Whereas the Trojans are nothing but negative Priam is an old, deluded fool. Hektor is not old, but a deluded fool for all that.

The women - Honestly, Colleen? Did you have to? You are female; you managed strong women in the Masters of Rome (perhaps even overly strong?) and yet all your women here act and think, even in their own POVs, like the ancient men thought they behaved and thought. My disappointment was vast.

In addition, as a final straw, all points of view in the book have the same voice. Somehow, despite the fact that one is told by Agamemnon, another by Odysseus, and a third by a semi-anonymous commander, the language of all parts was the very same.

It was not a poorly written book, but I found my enjoyment of it too often curtailed by annoyance.