Rating: 4/5

This is not a long book, but it often felt that way. Verbose, densely-written, with constant references to the state of literature - and publishing - in Boston just after the end of the Civil War. It really helps if the reader has some knowledge of the history, location, and the social and political complexities of the time. Seriously, it often assumed we all know who Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, James Russell Lowell, Oliver Wendell Holmes and a few others are. Now I do know, but I still mixed them up. 

I'd be reading about one of them dashing off somewhere and then the scene would change to the study of a house where another was sitting, reading, perusing - and I'd think, wasn't he just running down the road? No, no, no! Get your famous, mid-nineteenth century New England, literary figures straight!

The story: there are a series of gruesome murders going on in Boston which mimic some of the deaths in Dante Alighieri's famous 'Divine Comedy,' specifically from the 'Inferno.' (The three men mentioned above, along with publisher James Field, are involved in studying and translating Dante's famous work.) They become bedeviled and bewildered by how the murders and book are connected. There's also a subplot which weaves its way in and out of the story concerning the Harvard Corporation, a group which wants to restrict or ban Dante's work, viewing it as too vulgar - and too Catholic - for consumption by both the young men at the university and the public in general. 

There are other elements in the book, too, including the intense racial prejudice directed at former slaves who have moved north. This includes one who is biracial and has been hired as the state's first black police officer. (However, he can't arrest white citizens and has to wear civilian clothes.) Women are present, but usually in the background, being the frail, helpless creatures they are, and there's concern about the new influx of immigrants, mostly Irish and Italian. (Both groups are hated equally.) There's the state of the church, mostly Unitarian, and commentaries on public morals and expectations, politics and crime, the rise of a somewhat coordinated police force, and so forth. In fact, the book often did my head in and I'd think...

I need to look that up in Wikipedia!

But I seldom did. I went with the flow, whether confused or not, and found the entire novel to be mostly entertaining. I also read much of it in a rather 'sleepy state' as the World Series (2018) was going on. I'd read before, after, and sometimes during the games, setting it aside to cheer or scream at the TV. 

But it held my interest and I'll probably read the sequel. 

Four stars