Rating: 5/5

ONE OF THE BEST ADVENTURE NOVELS OF MODERN TIMES
 
Only drawback; it's long, too long, but for sheer imaginative scope, Wilbur Smith's River God tops everything I've ever read. The story is narrated by the charming eunuch slave Taita, whose secret passion for queen Lostris surprises - until we learn Taita reached manhood before being castrated in order to render him "safe" for service in the harem. He retains his passion, artistic drives and incredible ego, and the exercise of these alone are entertainment of the highest order. 

After his responsibility to the queen, Taita's primary task in life is to oversee the creation of the treasures the pharaoh will carry to the next life. Along the way - if you believe Taita's egotistical and often condescending reports (and I loved believing) - he engineers the cutting of stones for the pyramid, personally carves the most exquisite of the golden treasures to be entombed with the ruler, influences most of Pharoah's decisions, protects his friends and destroys his enemies and oh yes, devises equipment and tactics which make the army invincible. 

Ultimately, however, the Hyksos arrive, an enemy whose primary weapon - the horse - is unknown. The hoard drives toward the capital city, defeating the Pharoah's forces wherever they are met and finally it is necessary for Taita to oversee putting everything of value aboard barges and direct the flight to the south. 

In the high place where the Nile valley ends and the vast plain of Africa begins, Taita and the remnants of the royal family go into hiding while Taita, deprived of his pyramid, struggles to conceive a way to create a safe tomb. Here, unfortunately, Smith has essentially exhausted his story material. The lengthy narrative covers decades, and becomes a relatively colorless telling of events - and as the end sections set up the precedents for The Seventh Scroll, (second novel in the sequence), of unfortunate necessity everything must be kept suitably vague. We never learn where the pharaoh is finally buried, and the whole story kind of subsides rather than coming to a rousing end. 

It doesn't matter. What has already gone has left the imagination reeling and sated. There's also the story that awaits in The Seventh Scroll - I had no idea what it would be, but let me tell you, it knocked my socks off. 
If you are tired of the same old same old, I suggest you buy River God and treat yourself to a read that will stir your imagination like no other. 
If Wilbur Smith lived on Lake Ontario, he'd have written "The Secret Ever Keeps". He lives in Africa, so I had to do it for him. If you love Smith, you'll love "The Secret Ever Keeps". http://www.amazon.com/gp/product/1601...