Rating: 2/5

Having read 'Love in the time of Cholera' and 'One Hundred Years of Solitude' by the same author, I found this one quite dull. Magical realism, which is at the core of GG's works, was evident in this novel as well, but combining it with a murder mystery (but you realize later that it is not actually a mystery) made it a tad uninteresting for me.
First of all, the non - linear fashion in which the book is written actually contradicts with the title. Many key events are obscured and the narrator has not chronologically revealed the order of the events. 
Secondly, the themes of memory, symbolism and reality seem jumbled to me. 
Thirdly, there is a lot of repetition of events surrounding the crime. Yes, repetition is a key component of GG's magical realism but it did not seem to be hitting the mark in this book. All in all, I'd say that the book was a repetitive and purely investigative work with no further findings or outcomes. In this manner, the narrator also seems very enigmatic, but with inconclusive results. 

The book includes the theme of a woman being on the periphery. The very fact that death was considered a reasonable payback / retribution for the crime of taking a girl's virginity manifests how abominable it was to sleep with an unmarried woman. 
This also ruined her chances of marrying well (if at all), and marriage was seen as women's one way to progress in the world, instead of being seen as an alliance that would prosper the growth for both.

Coming to the theme of 'mystery' yet again, I reckon that the real mystery is 'why' (and 'how' as well, but the 'how' is countered as this is a Magical Realism work ) the entire town allowed the murder to happen; with, at best, only lackluster efforts to stop it or even alert the victim.

However, I found a few interesting and thought–provoking quotes from the book: 

1. A falcon who chases a warlike crane can only hope for a life of pain.
2. The hunt for love is haughty falconry.

Coming to the rating, for now I will round off my 2.35 stars to 2. May be, if I come and read this one later, I can think of revising the rating.