Rating: 1/5

I started to read this book not knowing anything about the author or what the story would be about (the blurb was very formulaic). I chose it mainly because it was short, and it took me only three days to finish it. I am now going to ramble a bit, collecting my thoughts on the book. 

Reading along, i wondered where the book was meant to be going. Gabriel, the eponymous main character is a London teenager, an only child whose parents, washed up 70s hipsters, have just separated. In the second chapter, Gabriel meets an uber pop star that his father used to tour with back in the days. It was fairly obvious that this musician is supposed to be David Bowie. 
At around the same time I was reading this book I noticed that David Bowie has a new album out; there had been advertisement for it flashing up on my Amazon page. I thought, well, I am probably going to buy it, most likely as soon as it goes on sale. And I went to my CD shelf, pulling out some of my old Bowie CDs. I also wondered how he might be these days, "he is getting old, isn't he", I thought. The first time I came across David Bowie was in his guise as Jareth, the goblin king. That was in the late 80s, and I was maybe ten when I saw it for the first time, on videotape at a friend's house. Nevertheless, with that film, David Bowie would forever define "sexy villain" for me. In the 90s, I listened to a lot of his music, both old and recent. And I always liked him as as an actor. Let me just drop the key word "The Hunger" - one of the best vampire films ever. 
Doing some research, I found out that both Bowie and Kureishi went to the same school in south London (possibly not at the same time though, as Kureishi is 8 years younger).

What I didn't realize was that David's new CD was released on his 69th birthday, January 8 (Friday). I finished the book on Sunday. Monday morning, before I left the house, I heard it on the news that David Bowie had died. Sometimes coincidences can be so eery. I have to admit that I cried quite a bit that day. I don't remember a time when the death of someone I have never met made me feel such a personal loss. 

But back to the book. So not worth reading. The David Bowie character is a mere ploy who remains unimportant for the remainder of the story. More importantly, what exactly is Gabriel's gift? There is one scene in which he draws a pair of shoes and in a flicker of magical realism makes them thereby appear. This, however, remains unexplained, understated and stays unmentioned for the rest of the book. Further vaguenesses accumulate. Gabriel has conversations with his dead twin, who died as a little boy. This, too, stays underdeveloped and stale, it remains a faded idea of the invisible friend type that some kids have. In the end, it's a generic story about a kid whose parents split up, a story that has very little to say and that ends with a foreseeable happy ending. Seriously, what was Kureishi thinking when he wrote this? This was my first book by this author, and now I wonder whether I can take him seriously as a writer. Are any of his books worth reading? 

To me, this novel seemed like such a waste of time, no matter how quickly I had been finished with it.