Rating: 5/5

This is a bio with a particularly brutal twist. It's not a "pretty" book. It's a narrative of a viciously dysfunctional family. For those who don't know Chinese culture, it's also a pretty authentic look at the old hierarchy of family relationships. 

The nauseating/insane character of Niang, a truly Machiavellian monster of a stepmother, pervades the story, deforming family life. Adeline's innocent and understandably bewildered blundering through her early life is bad enough, but the story gets even more twisted as it goes along. 

The relentless battering of nasty events in the story isn't pleasant reading. The almost Gulag Archipelago-like nature of the cruelty in the family is impossible to like. It reminded me a bit of David Copperfield, at some points. 

Falling Leaves leaves for dead so many fictional versions of family life. This is a story of premeditated cruelty to a family member. I saw one review saying "Why should I care about this person" and another which disliked the way it claims Adeline presents herself as a "victim", with which I utterly disagree. 

I can't claim to understand, let alone sympathize, with either viewpoint on principle. Approving or disapproving of someone's life story isn't a very realistic approach to reading a bio. Would reviewers prefer that the person had a different life story? How? Excuse my mentioning this point, but if the criteria for biographies was whether or not reviewers "liked" someone's life story, literature would be much poorer. 

Western readers may find some difficulty understanding the cultural references. This is a very Chinese story. Add to this the Chinese revolution, the rise of Hong Kong after 1949 and the Cultural Revolution, and Falling Leaves is a good introduction to the realities of being Chinese in the modern sense. History for this generation of Chinese was pure hell. The very black irony in Falling Leaves is that the family managed to add so much misery to its existence at such a time in history, even while being comparatively rich. 

You will find this a particularly confronting book. You will not expect the ending, or the logic of family behaviour. There are no "cute" bits, and even the occasional softenings of some parts of the story have a range of payoffs. A fiction writer could not have written this book. Read it as a story, and you'll see a book that needed to be written. Read it as a bio, and you'll see a story which can barely fit in to the book. Adeline did a good job of making this tale comprehensible, and she deserves credit for that.