Rating: 4/5

I realized this book had sat on my shelf for over 20 years, and decided to see how it’s aged. It brought back the ‘90s, when me and my friends were belatedly discovering the New Age, and we were feeling excited about the possibilities of spiritual transformation. That was back before before I got cynical, feeling that some of my friends took their spiritual missions too seriously for my toleration. Still, I liked the book more than I expected. Some parts seemed a touch flaky, but mostly it was decent, helpful insight into how people grow and mature. I felt it was encouraging, compassionate, and realistically hopeful. When I finished the book on the subway, I went off through the crowds feeling more connected to all the people around.

Still, I have a question. Redfield says that one of the main signs of change in our awareness concerns “synchronicity.” I’ll give his claim:

“Increasingly more of us, it seems, are becoming aware of the meaningful coincidences that occur every day. Some of these events are large and provocative. Others are small, almost imperceptible. But all of them give us evidence that we are not alone, that some mysterious process is influencing our lives. Once we experience the sense of inspiration and aliveness that these perceptions evoke, it is almost impossible not to pay attention. We begin to watch for these events, to expect them, and to actively seek a higher philosophical understanding of their appearance.” (p. xviii)

I’m sure we all have our moments, suddenly seeing patterns, making connections, or realizing next steps forward. And maybe we feel like we’re being guided rather than just growing a bit more aware. But at this point, what can we say about “noticing synchronicity” as a path toward our future? After all the recent blizzard of conspiracy theories, with people seeing “signs” on every side? What’s an intelligent response to having intuitions? I don’t have a good answer, but I think it’s easy to bullshit ourselves. Maybe we should take our intuitions as raising good questions more than as providing right answers.