Rating: 5/5

“Did-a-chick? Dum-a-chum? Dad-a-cham? Ded-a-check?”

This bit of nonsense is likely to send shivers down the spine of Dark Tower fans, it is one of the most memorable scenes in the entire series which spans seven books (originally). The bizarre “questions” are constantly asked by the “lobstrosity” creatures even while they are munching on people.

The above picture—lifted from the graphic novel edition—is not quite to scale as the lobstrosity is described in The Drawing of the Three as “four feet long and a foot high”, but the creepiness is about right! 

The Drawing of the Three is volume two of Stephen King’s epic Dark Tower series. If my memory serves me correctly it is my favorite book of the series. This book is all about Roland Deschain recruiting three characters from our world to help him in his quest for the Dark Tower. As foretold by The Man in Black in the previous book these three are represented on Tarot cards as The Prisoner, The Lady of Shadows, and Death. Roland is to go through three doors which are portals into our world at different times.

The first of the three doors

The first person to be drawn to our world is “The Prisoner” Eddie Dean. Eddie is not imprisoned anywhere, but he is a heroin addict. The “drawing” of Eddie Dean involves drug smuggling, gangsters, a shootout au naturel, and more lobstrosities; never a dull moment. 

Odetta / Detta by LadyFiszi.

The second “drawing” is of a black lady called Odetta Holmes who suffers from dissociative identity disorder schizophrenia with multiple personalities (see Stephanie's message 10 in the comments section) and has an evil secondary personality called Detta Walker who takes control of her body from time to time (usually when it is the most inexpedient for our heroes). Odetta is kindly and soft-spoken, while Detta is evil, cunning, and deadly, she talks like “a cartoon black woman, Butterfly McQueen gone Loony Tunes”. Even though she is missing legs below her knees Detta is very capable of killing both Roland and Eddie who she charmingly calls “honky mahfahs”.

The last drawing of The Three is not at all who I was expecting*, it involves a character even more psychotic than Detta. Without going into details it involves possession, crazy hyperkinetic shootouts, more lobstrosities and a unique way of dispatching a villain.

Art by Phil Hale

Phew! What a book! I hope I have not spoiled anything so far, if you think I did please let me know in the comments. The Drawing of the Three is a fabulous, riveting and thrilling read. The writing style here is much more typically Stephen King than the previous volume, The Gunslinger, where King takes a stab at some lyrical writing in the early chapters that confused my young mind when I first read it. I have to admit this is how I like my King. Screw “literature”, just tell the story so vividly that the reader is transported into Roland’s world (even though it has “moved on”). King’s accessible writing style is one of his chief weapons, it is the most effective way of conveying his outlandish narrative. Even with all the carnage going on the book is occasionally hilarious, with pop culture references and an almost “TMI” rectal examination scene. The “Roland in New York City” part is particularly amusing, with his bemusement by the city life and his failed attempt to avoid violence. Imagine Clint Eastwood’s The Man with No Name in modern day New York and you will have an inkling. The book does not end on a cliffhanger yet it does make you want to commit to the series, to follow Roland and his friends on the quest for the Tower, to see what happens next. As Roland would say, “it’s ka”.
 
Notes:
* I thought it was going to be poor Jake Chambers from The Gunslinger, but poor Jake only makes a quick cameo in this volume.

• Idris Elba is unlikely to be called “honky mahfah” in the forthcoming Dark Tower movie. Here is King's comment about the casting.

• Roland’s classic “ka-tet”, the crew of his quest, is not fully formed in this book, awaiting a couple more members. So this picture below, from the graphic novel edition, is a little misleading.

Quotes:
“There is an umbilicus which somehow connects our world to the world of the gunslinger.”

“The first is dark-haired. He stands on the brink of robbery and murder. A demon has infested him. The name of the demon is HEROIN.”
“Which demon is that? I know it not, even from nursery stories.”

“He walked out of nowhere toward nowhere, a man from another time who, it seemed, had reached a point of pointless ending.”

“Not his eyes but those of a stranger. Not hazel but a blue the color of fading Levis. Eyes that were chilly, precise, unexpected marvels of calibration. Bombardier’s eyes.”