Rating: 2/5

There's an unwritten contract when you're reading a nonfiction book, especially as a kid: that everything you're taking in is factual information. You assume that authors are honest, their chief goal is to present the world as it is, and that someone, somehow would have caught any mistakes before they made their way to print. With that assurance, readers read in the spirit of unguarded absorption, rather than the slow and painstaking resistance of active fact-checking. The Bermuda Triangle by Charles Berlitz is a betrayal of that trust. Almost nothing it has to say withstands scrutiny. It misrepresents history and science. And yet, it's bold enough to claim on the back cover: "These unexplained disappearances ... are not scenarios for a science fiction movie but recorded events of one of the great unsolved mysteries of our time". As a result, with 30 million copies in print and countless spinoff TV "documentaries", this book is primarily responsible for multiple generations of the public not only knowing the term "Bermuda Triangle", but falsely associating it with danger and disappearances.

The Bermuda Triangle itself is an invented region: it doesn't show up on standard maps, and its boundaries are inconsistently defined by proponents. The term was introduced in the 1964 Argosy article "The Deadly Bermuda Triangle" by Vincent Gaddis. Here's how Gaddis defined it: "Draw a line from Florida to Bermuda, another from Bermuda to Puerto Rico, and a third line back to Florida through the Bahamas. Within this area, known as the 'Bermuda Triangle,' most of the total vanishments have occurred." Note the heavy lifting of the word "most"*, as well as the fact that "Florida" does not describe a single point on a map. Miami is typically substituted as the third point. Gaddis reported a handful of mysterious incidents, but his chief exhibit was the 1945 disappearance of five bombers and their 14-member crew off the coast of Florida (more on that later). The event had been written about in 1952 (Fate Magazine) and 1962 (American Legion Magazine), but even with Gaddis's new moniker, "The Bermuda Triangle" did not yet catch on with the public.

Shoot forward a decade, and trade books started covering the story, including 1973's Limbo of the Lost and 1974's The Devil's Triangle. The breakaway star, however, was 1974's The Bermuda Triangle by Charles Berlitz. The author's name will sound familiar if you've heard of the Berlitz Method of language learning. That's no coincidence: Maximilian Berlitz - Charles's grandfather - founded the company in 1878. Part of the lore is that Charles was intentionally raised by diverse language speakers: his father only spoke to him in German, his mother in French, his grandfather in Russian, his nanny in Spanish, and so on. On various book jackets, he is described as speaking "thirty languages, give or take a few" (1969), a "master of thirty languages" (1974), "fluent in twenty-seven languages" (1977), and speaking "twenty-five languages with varying degrees of fluency" (1989). Whatever the number, it's impressive, but the image of Charles Berlitz as a cultured sophisticate further lent him the imprimatur of reliability. That's fine when it comes to language, but Berlitz sold the company in the 1960s and started writing books on fringe topics in addition to his works on language acquisition. The first of these was 1969's The Mystery of Atlantis (my review here), followed by 1972's Mysteries from Forgotten Worlds (my review here). The Bermuda Triangle was his third effort. After its colossal success, Berlitz went on to write about unsubstantiated topics like Roswell, the Philadelphia Experiment, the search for Noah's Ark, and the coming end of the world in 1999 (we all remember that).

Berlitz is even inconsistent in how he defines the location of the triangle. On page 11 he more than doubles its size by shooting out the bottom edge far, far past Puerto Rico. "From Bermuda in the north to southern Florida, and then east to a point through the Bahamas past Puerto Rico to about 40° west longitude and then back again to Bermuda." [see illustration above] He then presents the myth: "This area occupies a disturbing and almost unbelievable place in the world's catalogue of unexplained mysteries. ... More than 100 planes and ships have literally vanished into thin air ... more than 1,000 lives have been lost in the past twenty-six years, without a single body or even a piece of wreckage from the vanishing planes or ships having been found." Berlitz cites stories of devices malfunctioning, compasses spinning, and blue skies turned yellow and hazy. His offered explanations include "sudden tidal waves caused by earthquakes, fireballs which explode the planes, attacks by sea monsters, a time-space warp leading to another dimension, electromagnetic or gravitational vortices which cause planes to crash and ships to lose themselves at sea, capture and kidnapping by flying or submarine UFOs manned by entities from surviving cultures of antiquity, outer space, or the future..." But don't worry, he's just getting warmed up. There will be many more potential culprits. One key source for Berlitz is Edgar Cayce, the clairvoyant who not only predicted that Atlantis would rise again from the sea near Bermuda in 1968 (we all remember that), but also pointed to an Atlantean crystal power source as the cause of disappearances. As he concludes in one chapter: "The deeper we go into the problem ... the more we begin to wonder whether there even exists, within our familiar framework of scientific reference, what might be called a logical explanation." You may have spotted the trend: Berlitz isn't actually interested in solving mysteries; he just likes spinning them.

Though Berlitz produces a list of 19 major ship/crew disappearances and 16 aircraft disappearances, it's worth focusing on the aforementioned 1945 disappearance of five U.S. Navy bombers: the incident know as Flight 19. The actual events are fairly well understood. The bombers set off eastward on a training exercise from Fort Lauderdale, successfully dropped their payload, turned north, but then flight instructor Charles Taylor became unaccountably confused and refused to follow protocol. In the ensuing mess of inconsistent communication, ignored advice from the tower, and the students' inability to take command, Taylor led the crew of 14 farther out into sea where they eventually ran out of fuel. The real mysteries are what was going on in Taylor's head, and where the planes eventually crashed in the Atlantic. To complicate things (and add to the lore), one of the rescue planes sent after Flight-19, a PBM Mariner flying boat, exploded mid-air, adding 13 lost lives to the day's tragic tally. That's a compelling enough story on its own, but Charles Berlitz wanted to amplify the mysterious elements. Instead of reporting on the day's rough seas and rain, Berlitz describes the planes as disappearing out of a bright, cloudless sky. Each plane normally had 3 crew members, but one person stayed on the base that day. Berlitz concocts an elaborate story about the missing crewman's psychic intuition that something wasn't right. In reality, the man had just completed his necessary flight hours and requested to be excused from the flight. The worst bit of Berlitz's fabrication involved adding dialog to the transcripts from the control tower. He cites "other listeners" as saying Taylor described anomalous white waters. He also has Taylor saying he doesn't know which way west is, everything looks different, and even the water doesn't look right. When confronted directly about these additions in a 1976 NOVA documentary, Berlitz claims he heard them from then-Lieutenant Wirshing. The documentary crew followed up with Wirshing, who said he did not keep contemporaneous notes as Berlitz had stated, and that he could not corroborate any of the added dialog because he arrived at the control tower after those communications concluded. (That documentary is fantastic, by the way. You can watch it on YouTube. Berlitz even more irresponsibly appends new dialog provided 29 years after the event (from a reporter who claims a ham radio operator told him): "Don't come after me ... they look like they are from outer space."

Berlitz has a fondness for crackpots and conspiracy theorists, and uncritically presents their pet theories alongside official sources. We've already mentioned the "Sleeping Prophet" Edgar Cayce, but Berlitz recruited another as his collaborator: Dr. J. Manson Valentine. The doctorate is in entomology, but the two connected over an obsession with the lost continent of Atlantis. Valentine gets a small credit at the intro of the book, and is the source of many of the photograph illustrations, but is also frequently cited as an independent expert in the book. For example, he is quoted as saying about the missing crew from Flight 19: "They are still here, but in a different dimension of a magnetic phenomenon that could have been set up by a UFO." Sigh. Berlitz also promotes the theories of Ivan Sanderson, who claimed "vile vortices" of magnetic aberrations were responsible for the Bermuda Triangle and the Devil's Sea (a similar triangle of doom off the coast of Japan). Berlitz also gives air time to Immanuel Velikovsky, the catastrophist whose Worlds In Collision postulated that ancient myths preserved the records of massive impacts between the planets in our solar system. He also promotes John Spencer's speculation that UFOs may be abducting people and equipment in order to ensure that we haven't developed to a degree threatening to the rest of the galaxy. Add to that Hugh Auchincloss Brown, Ralph Barker... it's a long parade of kooky white men. At one point, Berlitz expresses irritation with the Coast Guard for offering prosaic explanations and relegating his favorite "experts" to a brief bibliography. When Berlitz doesn't have someone to champion a theory, he is perfectly happy to invent one. For example, anonymous sources tell him they saw Atlantean ships in the Bermuda Triangle. Great. What are we supposed to do with that? How did they know the ships belonged to an ancient, unestablished culture? Elsewhere, he quotes an "information officer" of the U.S. Navy as saying, "It’s almost as if the ships have been suddenly covered by some sort of electronic camouflage net." Great. Just great.

I promised more phenomena offered to explain the Bermuda Triangle occurrences, so here's a handful: mists, fogs, atmospheric anomalies, electrical anomalies, blue holes (caves under the water that pull boats down?), whirlpools, tidal waves, tsunamis, seiche waves (new to me: waves caused by wind, seismic activity, or a variety of other unusual factors), clear air turbulence (also new to me), inter dimensional passageways, anti-gravitational particles of matter, and sargassum. Oh yes! How can I forget sargassum? It's a seaweed that creates huge mats of floating matter that creates all kinds of [known and understood] problems for ships. The Sargasso Sea covers a large swath of the Atlantic that overlaps the Bermuda Triangle.

At some point, Berlitz grows weary of talking about the Bermuda Triangle and devotes multiple chapters to ancient alien hypotheses and various other collected oddities. Having read quite a few of his books, I can say that he recycles material continuously. Vast swaths of this book are repackaged presentations of material he covered in The Mystery of Atlantis and Mysteries from Forgotten Worlds. Here we learn about items and artwork found in Maya ruins that have been interpreted as ancient astronauts, flying craft, or navigation markers for space travelers (short research summary: they were none of those things). He talks about the Nazca lines (Peruvian geoglyphs visible from the sky), the Baghdad battery (not a battery), Egyptian illustrations of giant lightbulbs (absurd), advanced mathematics baked into the pyramids (arbitrary and absurd), maps from hundreds of years ago that foretold modern discoveries (selective logic), reincarnation and inherited memories (unproven), psychokinesis experiments (with poor controls), and the assertion that we only use 10% of our brains (nope). And, as with all ancient alien theorizing, there's plenty of subtle racism, especially when it comes to stories of ancient white visitors who brought advanced knowledge to primitive cultures. Sometimes the racism is not so subtle: "...with the advanced Cro-Magnon type replacing the brutish Nanderthal man, it was still possible during Earth's long history for both these types, and others as well, to coexist, a situation we find existing even today in a world population which includes atomic scientists and Australian aborigines." Jeeeesus.

On rare occasion, Berlitz will nod to actual, factual answers or established science, but without much fanfare and very much in the spirit of let's-keep-moving. "There are many marine or aeronautical authorities who would observe that it is perfectly natural for planes, ships, or yachts to disappear in an area where there is so much sea and air travel, subject to sudden storms and the multiple possibilities of navigational mistakes and accidents. These same authorities are likely to make the comment that the Bermuda Triangle does not exist at all, and that the very term is a misnomer, a manufactured mystery for the diversion of the curious and imaginative reader." Well, yes... that sounds quite rational, Berlitz! But that doesn't give you much to write about, now does it? In that 1976 PBS NOVA, The Case of the Bermuda Triangle, they also interview Richard Winer, author of that other 1974 triangle book. He says, "Anything we don't know is mysterious. And if I didn't try to make my book mysterious, I would have another book like... [Lawrence] Kusche's is just a bunch of facts and incidents, which most of the reviewers say is just plain, dull reading. I try to make my book interesting." And there we have it: the quiet part said out loud. Some authors, when faced with what they see as a choice between telling the truth or selling more books, choose the latter.

*Fun fact: if you plot the most famous cases in the Bermuda Triangle mythos, almost all of them actually occurred outside of the triangle. Hundreds of thousands of ships and planes travel into and out of the triangle every year without incident. I traveled there myself earlier this year, and had a great time. And yet, many people wished me luck: some with smiles, and others in all seriousness. As it turns out, there has never actually been a higher incident of disappearances of any kind. As the great Ray Hyman said: "Do not try to explain something until you are sure there is something to be explained."