Rating: 5/5

2024: I got to school today to teach ESL only to discover that I was going to teach third grade instead. They happened to be reading Because of Winn-Dixie, one of my all time favorite middle grade kids books. The kids are highly motivated learners and do a lot of independent work so I could not resist reading this gem to refamiliarize myself as they discovered the world around them. Coincidentally I first learned about this book when my mom used it to help adult ESL students with their English. Everything happens for a reason and today it was so I could reread this gem. It was just as beautiful the third (fourth?) time around. I lost track because my kids all read this as well when they were in elementary school and I read it every time it was in the house. Now to rewatch the movie without tearing up if that is possible. 

2016: I think this is the year that I have discovered young adult and middle grade fiction as a genre full of quality books. Always looking for wholesome books for my kids, I saw this book on a few friends' feeds, and it happened to be at the library the last time I went. Because of Winn-Dixie is Kate DeCamillo's Newberry Award winning debut novel. It features ten year old India Opal Buloni who has just moved from Watley to Naomi, Florida with her father the Preacher. Lonely for the last seven years since her alcoholic mother ran away, Opal shops one day and discovers a lost dog who she aptly named Winn-Dixie. Opal and Winn-Dixie need each other and the preacher allows the dog to stay in their adult trailer park home. 

We meet the cast of characters in Naomi and they all have a sad past. From Otis at the pet store to Miss Franny Block at the library to Gloria Dump and all the children in town, each person has a painful event that they are trying to forget or move on from. They all open up and start enjoying life again due to the combined warmth of Winn-Dixie's personality and Miss Franny's Littmus Lozenge candies. I recently read Where the Heart Is by Billie Letts. Because of Winn-Dixie seems like a kids book twin of the this book. Both feature a young girl or woman who move to small town from a troubled past and breathe in all the charm that the community has to offer. 

I highly recommend this book to middle grade kids and the adults in their lives who are looking for a positive read. It could either be read at home or aloud in class and I'm sure it will generate many positive discussions about family, community, and life as a whole.

🐶 5 paws up, I mean stars 🐶