Rating: 5/5

In college, I first heard Walter Benjamin’s quote that “history is written by its victors”. These words continue to influence the way I view historical narratives today- an understanding that the history we learn only represents the socio-cultural lens of the body that is telling the history.

I recall this quote because - for my whole life - I have learned the history of Hong Kong through stories my family has shared with me, but have never been able to truly contextualize them within the history I was taught - my grandma rushing out onto the streets of Hong Kong to celebrate the departure of the Japanese, my grandpa and his sister sent to escape to Hong Kong as unaccompanied children to seek a better life, my grandmothers family narrowly escaping the Nanking massacre and sending their children to study in disparate corners of the English speaking world, ancestors from my grandfathers family losing their wealth by returning to China during communist revolution only to realize their naïveté towards the revolution would quickly turn their backs on them. These are stories that have been casually shared with me - bits of information sprinkled here and there for me to collect and eventually weave into a coherent understanding of my family (and city’s history).

Until I went away to boarding school, I never expressed a big interest in learning about my city’s history. But throughout high school and university, I turned to courses on Chinese history and a thesis on contemporary Chinese art in an attempt to better understand the history that shaped my family. I had always sensed that my understanding of this history was too Eurocentric- but could not put my finger on what exactly it was, when the facts were accurate.

It wasn’t until I read this book that I understood what it was- I simply never saw my family’s perspective represented against the Eurocentric narrative of Chinese history (I had learned to study the history as a disassociated third party perspective and not in a way that encouraged me to see myself within it).

Adelaide’s memoir is set against the backdrop of 19th century China and Hong Kong. She would be between my grandparents and parents’ ages. She tells the story of her family’s business and wealth in 19th/20th century China, move to Hong Kong during the communist revolution, and her and her siblings’ lives abroad in the late 20th century. Aside from the abusive family dynamics, I saw my family’s history mirrored in almost every change that the Yen family endured. I saw my city evolve through vignettes of the Yen family moving through it.

Throughout the book, our sense of time in the book is anchored by major historical events: The fall of guomingdang and how it triggered the family’s move to Hong Kong, the rise of Hong Kong as an economic powerhouse and the opportunities it created for Adelaide’s dad, and sino-British negotiations over Hong Kong and its influence on Hong Kong emigration. It is here that - for the first time in my life - I am truly able to contextualize my family’s experiences in history. I am able to see my grandpa’s travels through the Yen family’s move to a Hong Kong, why my third cousins abroad feel indebted to my family’s generosity for hosting them in Hong Kong as they were preparing for immigration, the motivations behind my great grand uncle’s return to China during the communist revolution (which, until this book, we had always thought was “dumb”). It is this access to a deeply personal narrative woven against the backdrop of historical events that has allowed me to finally “see” my family in history. 

I feel grateful to have come across this book, if only because, for the first time in my life, I have found something that has provided me with the foundational frame to contextualize my family’s stories- so that, instead of just collecting, I can now begin to weave our stories together. 

This book is 5 stars- and more if I could give it- because not only did it provide me the foundation I had been seeking all this time to contextualize my family stories, but it also did so in a way that was invigorating and emotional. I could not put it down and immediately feel a rush to reread it. I would recommend this to anyone with roots in Hong Kong who is craving a better understanding of themselves and their city.