Rating: 1/5

I wish I had spent my time reading Dante's "Inferno" rather than wasting my precious hours on "The Dante Club." I usually give a book 50 pages and if it doesn't grab me by then, I stop reading it. In spite of the fact that this one failed my 50 page test miserably, I was determined to finish it because it was a book club pick, so I forced myself to read one chapter every day--a grueling chore from beginning to end. 

Matthew Pearl writes what is part murder mystery and part historical fiction about a series of murders taking place in the 19th century Boston of Lowell, Longfellow, and Holmes--major characters here--who are in the process of translating Dante's "Inferno" when the murders take place. What a great premise for a book, right? That's what I thought when I started reading "The Dante Club," but Matthew Pearl failed in his execution. For one, he failed to breathe life into these historical figures as characters. A telltale sign was that my mind wandered whenever I started reading, and the characters kept merging in my mind because they were not well drawn or defined. So while it failed for me in this regard as historical fiction, it also failed as a murder mystery. 

While I am not a fan of murder mysteries in general, I have read enough of them to know that clues should be given along the way that invite readers to play along and try to solve the puzzle (as is done well in Orhan Pamuk's "My Name is Red," for example). No such clues were given here. The best parts of this book were the literary minutiae about the attitudes Lowell and Longfellow had about Emerson, Poe, and Whitman (whom they disparage on more than one occasion), which made me laugh a little in recognition. It turns out the joke was on Lowell, Longfellow, and Holmes, since people today actually still read and study Poe, Whitman, and Emerson. Was Pearl trying to be humorous there? It wasn't clear (since the book seems to take itself so seriously), and that was another weakness of the book for me. Moreover, none of the minutiae Pearl provided was new to me since my area of specialization in graduate school was 19th and 20th century American literature, which makes it even more puzzling just what audience Pearl is writing to if even I could barely get through "The Dante Club." When Pearl finally does start to delve into the psychology of the killer (which was intriguing), it was too little, too late.

Besides these failures, Pearl's writing was clumsy and uneven. He needs to use pronouns once in a while to avoid repetition of the characters' names, but then again, maybe if he had done that, it would have emphasized the poor character development even more. "The Dante Club" was not my kind of book, and I wouldn't recommend it, but at least it made me want to revisit Dante's "Inferno," so I guess it wasn't a complete waste of time.