Rating: 4/5

"in truth, i live on poetry. my dreams have a solomonic magnificence. i love beauty, power, grace, money, luxury, kisses, and music. i am naught but a man of art. i am good for nothing else. i believe in God, and i am attracted to mystery. i am befuddled by daydreams and death; i have read many philosophers yet i know not a word of philosophy. i do espouse a certain epicureanism, of my own sort: let the soul and body enjoy as much as possible on earth, and do everything possible to continue that enjoyment in the next life. which is to say that je vois la vie en rose." 

this genuinely had some of the most beautiful writing that i've read in a very long time. there were so many lines that i highlighted and marked because they just stuck out to me. rubén darío's writing is absolutely gorgeous—it's genuinely just beautiful. his writing is so dimensional and unique and it all feels very intentional. i had such a good time reading this collection and seeing all of these different pieces. it was just such a good read and i definitely recommend it. it looks a little intimidating because it's such a large book, but it is so worth it. and it's not a very difficult read either. it's fairly quick, but meaningful at the same time. 

i wonder how his writing would read in the original spanish and what nuances are lost in the translation, but unfortunately, i do not speak a word of spanish and must settle with the english translation. still, i think his poetry holds up even through translation. one of my absolute favourites was called war which is too long for me to copy paste into this review, but it felt so striking and it just stuck out to me. 

i'm not particularly a poetry person. i like it! i definitely do! but i almost always prefer prose over poetry. even when it comes to writing, i've never found myself to be very good at poetry because i am completely incapable of ever being succinct and i love to use more words than ever necessary, but i really enjoyed this. i found a lot of the poems to be very compelling and i just wanted to tear them out and tape them onto my wall. 

it's not a collection of banger after bangers. there are some that i felt fall flat, but i feel like that's inevitable with any type of collection. i just think that overwhelmingly, i enjoyed the writing in this. i think i would really like to read through it more in the future and make more notes because i feel like i could read this several times over and still be enchanted by the beauty of the writing. 

idk this sounds so pretentious i just really enjoyed it.