Rating: 5/5

I can now clarify, not only with myself, but with every other King fan, that this particular book gave me rather noticeable palpitations and for a moment or two, it made me feel quite faint. I've seen 'The Green Mile' Tom Hanks film adaptation, and although that was also amazing, and it makes for edge-of-the-seat viewing at times, when all is said and done, it has nothing on this book.

This book is up there with my list I like to call "King mind-fucks" and in that group are books like The Shining and Pet Sematary and right there, just on the outside looking in, is Cujo, who didn't quite make that group, but still, it's a book I consider a 'classic King'

There are elements of horror within these pages, but it is done in a subtle way, and I think King gets more of a result with subtle, and not with in your face blood and gore. It just works better, especially for me, and it admittedly makes my toes curl. 

The story is led by Paul Edgecombe, who is a guard in charge of 'The Green Mile' which is a block that houses purely death row inmates. While Paul was there, his block housed some wild and mostly unforgettable characters, one being John Coffey, a larger than life man, who was afraid of the dark, and had been accused of a absolutely horrific crime. John Coffey changes the lives of the inmates, and the guards who work on the mile, and we feel human compassion and emotion at it's finest. 

The characters are finely drawn with such care, and I felt as if I knew some of those personally. I completely loathed the little dick Percy Whetmore, and I haven't hated a character as much as I did Percy Whetmore at poor Del's execution. It made for horrendously uncomfortable reading, and that was mainly due to Percy Whetmore. He is a despicable excuse for a human being, that literally thrived on watching other people suffer. 

I admire the way King writes about how Paul Edgecombe and his men attempt to give the men on death row respect, and dignity until the day when they have to sit on the 'Old Sparky'. I think King captures these tender but also powerful moments with ease, and with a skilful level that is pretty rare to me. 

I finished this book this morning, and I'm still sitting about thinking about it. I can report that my heart is somewhat calmer, but I very much doubt that I'll be able to forget this book for the years ahead of me. But, let's be honest here, why on earth would I want to?