Rating: 5/5

I give this book five stars even though it really isn't much of a novel, it's mainly just three kids telling stories about how they view the creepy world of consumerism and status. I read this shortly after returning to the States after living a fairly idyllic and isolated life on the Mediterranean for three blissful years. I didn’t really get America when I got back, not at all. This was the first novel that I read that explained why I wasn’t entirely crazy for not being crazy for the American dream.

So, I had just moved from Greece (probably the best place I have ever lived, and I’ve lived in some great places; I’ve lived in Spain for the last 12 years) and I moved to suburban Washington, D.C., the worst fucking place I have ever lived. I just hated the traffic and endless sprawl (I didn’t even have the word “sprawl” in my vocabulary at that time; I just knew that I hated it).

My brother turned me on to this book after he had also been recently reintroduced to American culture. A lot of things in this book just hit home with me. Granted, I thought the male characters were way too soft for me and one of them, I felt, should have been screwing Claire, but the sexless nature of the males wasn’t a big problem. What drew me to the book more than anything was simply the tone, and the tone was “Is this really what it’s all about? Filling an SUV with a wife and family and taking two weeks a year on the beach somewhere?” 

I knew that wasn’t for me. 

He had a lot of great insights in this book, which is more than you can say for a lot of novels by the leading writers in America. I defy anyone to quote a decent insight of our culture from John Irving, Joyce Carrol Oates, Saul Bellow, or most of the pantheon of modern American literature (and yes, I know this dude is Canadian). 

This was the first novel that I read that questioned the American Dream or traditional values. It was the first time I heard anyone voice criticism towards what most considered the normal trajectory of adult life. All that I knew at the time was that the idea of going the route expected of people of my station had zero appeal to me. This book sort of let me know that I wasn’t alone.

Postscript:

You have to wonder if anyone from the Cell Phone-Facebook-Twitter-Video Game generation would even be capable of the sort of introspection found in this novel. I hate to stir up class warfare (What am I saying? I love stirring up class warfare!) but I doubt children of any sort of privileged status would even feel compelled to bother deconstructing their baffling world...at least it’s baffling to me. What would they call their book? Generation Like. Generation LOL, Genreation Chat-Click-Swipe, or maybe Generation Whatever?