Rating: 5/5

Complete 5 Golden Stars

one of my favourites

all the thrills, mysteries, the competition, more lovely characters. (some more jerks too that I wanted to hit their heads at the wall)
THAT ENDING!

Now I'm writing this, after many times re-read, I exactly remembered my first reaction after finishing this book, after that horror in the end of the book, I was awestruck; "WHY THIS BOOK IS OVER!? give me more!" &amp; then there was no book 5, you see the pain? after the biggest plot twists of the series (which I was looking forward to it so much) I had to wait!
Harry Potter series was my first in many things; my first novel, my first fantasy, my first book crush, &amp; one of them was my first Cliffhanger!

this book is the point that the world started to getting Darker &amp; a little out of mere-middle-grade-ish part. not that previous books were childish, but they're fun &amp; cute &amp; the protagonists are younger; suitable for both kids &amp; young readers, but now things getting more serious &amp; dark.
I love how Rowling's slowly revealing the wizarding world's secrets to us, each book has something new about the world. we have time to process the interesting new info &amp; remember it later. (the complete opposite of info-dump) &amp; I believe it's a talent.
&amp; here it's about the first war &amp; You know who's followers &amp; rituals.
We're also about to see the Quidditch World Cup (Fudge was so funny here!) &amp; getting more information about the magical educations around the world.

the plot; we knew something were off, but we can't exactly pinpointed it until the end when the truth revealed. Rowling knows how to reveal a plot twist in the most shocking way. (she actually proved it a few times in book 1, 2 &amp; 3! but still surprising how brilliant it is.)

Harry's suddenly in trouble &amp; he doesn't know how.
I like Krum.
&amp; all the predicaments the Trio should struggle through made by Rita Skeeter, bullies &amp; the mean students, but they didn't cower or hide, they held their head high &amp; ignoring them.

I always loved villains in disguises, they are interesting &amp; cunning &amp; we can't tell until they revealed their secrets. the feel of bewildered betrayal the hero going through.

the writing style is fun as always, comparing to book one, it has improved a lot, now it's graceful &amp; rich.
the villain's chapter was the best villain-ish/not-Harry-related POV in the whole series; intriguing &amp; spooky.

the movie was good, but didn't do the justice toward the book, it felt so rushed &amp; deleted many parts of the book.
I would've liked to see the Quidditch World cup Final match on the screen, the real "interesting" 3rd task &amp; the Sphinx, the hilarious scenes by Ludo, Dobby, Winky &amp; her story or showing the stubborn stupid refusal of that gargoyle to accept the truth &amp; the cleavage in the society in the end.
&amp; while fans are angry about "Dumbledore asked calmly" part that turned out the total opposite in the movie (&amp; I totally LAUGHED at that part everytime I reach that moment in either the book or the movie), I'm MAD at how movie Harry acted out-of-character in one scene in the movie (just because increasing the thrills I suppose) when he did exactly the opposite in the book.