Rating: 5/5

Characterizationality at it´s best prepares the stage for entering the masters´ universe.

It has more of stories surrounding the 2 main protagonists, whose paths continually come closer, than a plot driven horror novel, but how we get to meet them shows Kings´ ingenuity. Years have passed since I´ve read it and I can still vividly remember them, feel and fear with them.

Mental illness is both a difficult to describe and to deal with topic and King uses the full potential by switching between different personalities that seem so vivid and different that it creeps the hell out of the reader.

Addiction is another topic King is often referring to due to his experiences and the shivering cold turkey character is one of the closest manifestations of King himself who used to integrate much of his personal life in his novels. He wrote this piece at the height of his multidrug alcohol cocaine prescription drug phase that nearly destroyed his life, health, and marriage and the credible and realistic description of cold turkey and the craving for more was part of his real life. I´ve just quit smoking, but I immediately found myself again in one of the best anti-drug commercials ever. 

One of the reasons one doesn´t often read detailed descriptions of this topics is how hard they must to describe, the balance between exaggeration and downplaying, unwanted satire and belittling, or just not generating credibility for the character switches, cravings, and especially the performing of the protagonist fitting to the personal circumstances. 

Roland, of course, is still fingering around, but it´s more the novel of the junkie and the schizophrenic than the one of the revolver man, leaving him in the second row, leaving much room for the presentation of the trinity of the desperate.

The switching between reality and the alternate universe adds dynamic to the setting and prepares for entering the land of messed up, weird fantasy and terrors, and King is playing around with to give the partly eventless exposition more kicks, something he mostly stopped in his later works. These elements of elder literature that strongly influenced him, the use of allegories, mostly vanished due to using more general MacGuffins´ and Chekhovs´ and mostly just characters. That´s not bad, he evolved, but I 
sometimes miss this classy old storytelling style that has a more unique touch than the still great, but more disposable newer works.

Lucky you, you are not just still looking forward to meeting some pretty weird fellows, but have the whole Dark Tower series, that is lifting at exactly this moment, before you. But I can reread too, ha! Not as if that would be close to the magic of the first time, especially as I am so selfless and altruistic of remembering much of it to motivate you to read it and lose even more of this feeling that way, a thank you would be really appropriate, but please leave me the illusion.

Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: 
https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...