Rating: 3/5

Passion swells for this epic, The Prince of Tides, and so I swim in murky waters here, careful in my criticism not to become The Princess of Against the Tides.

Ah, hell. Who am I kidding? This princess often swims against the tide and her upper body is strong.

So, let me not mince words. Let's get right to it.

Pat Conroy has almost as many devotees as Jesus. I'm not sure about the source of the appeal, but he looks like a jolly gnome in the pictures I've seen of him, and I take him for a man who shook hands vigorously at book signings.

Okay, so he was affable (I'm not entirely sure; you'd need to ask Wife #1, Wife #2 or Wife #3 how she felt about him), and I enjoy affable types, but I'm not sure why more attention hasn't been placed on some of the damnable mistakes in his writing.

First off, Mr. Conroy is incredibly inconsistent. He'll write something lovely and memorable, like, “when we spoke of our childhood, it seemed part elegy, part nightmare.” 

Or, “I was the son of a beautiful, word-struck mother and I longed for her touch many years after she had no obligation to touch me.”

And then he'll carry on for eons with some overly wordy, barely readable prose. I would struggle, page after page, reading these “rants,” which felt almost like the long-winded stories my children tell me, as I drive them home from school. You know, the stories that feel as though they have no punctuation, no beginning or ending, and require the storyteller to say them all in one breath?

Also, um. . . ahem, anyone else made uncomfortable by Tom's mother wanting to make out with him and both brothers wanting to hook up with their sister? Who is this guy, John Irving? 

And, last but not least, the dialogue. For the love of God, come on, now! Even if you love this book, I ask you to return to it and read about 20 pages of the dialogue. Truly, do me this favor, before you deem me “harsh.” Clearly, this was not Mr. Conroy's strength as a writer, and, luckily he is more prone to descriptive narrative than passages of dialogue, but whenever it occurred, it pulled me right out of the story. Quick example:

“Where ya going, Tom?”
“Nowhere, Savannah. I'm going nowhere, Savannah.”
“But did ya want to, Tom? Did you want to go somewheres, Tom?”
“Nah, Savannah. But ya know what, Savannah? I'm hungry, Savannah.”

I'm telling you, I've read better dialogue produced in short stories by high school freshmen.

So. . . what made this story all the rage? Was it the occasionally beautiful prose? The imagery? I experienced some of that. Was it the focus that was placed on the need for men to pursue mental/emotional support? I liked that, too. Men need mental health outlets as much as women do, and I hate that our society has long made it taboo for them to seek it. Was this book instrumental in shifting mindsets? I don't know.

I do know that the movie did nothing to help my reading experience. I thought (almost relentlessly) of Barbra Streisand's acrylic nails and Nick Nolte's hair in his famous mugshot, as I was reading it. And, worse than that, I pictured Nick Nolte's mouth, slack from overdosing, whispering to Streisand's lacquered nails. . . Lowenstein. . . Lowenstein. 

Hard to get past that, though it's not the book's fault.

So, back to the book. Most Conroy diehards tell me that Tides isn't their favorite; it's typically The Great Santini, when I ask. I'd be happy to receive Conroy suggestions, and I'd be open minded toward another read.

This was just surprisingly disappointing to me.

Three stars, says the Princess Against the Tides. . . three stars for some great one-liners, a fantastic title, and the book's long-lasting, cultural impact.