Rating: 5/5

5★
"Lied by omission, as they all do, agents the world over. You teach them to cheat, to cover their tracks, and they cheat you as well."

If I were ever in any doubt that I'd be reading about those who do whatever it takes, I realised early on in this story to trust no one. I'm not saying there weren't people with honourable intentions, but mostly I wouldn't have been game to bet on any of them being who I thought they were.

There's not much point in my 'discussing' this introduction to the now-crowded world of spy novels, particularly about the Cold War era - has that actually ever ended? I saw the Richard Burton movie decades ago, but I've forgotten everything (except him, of course). 

I lived in Berlin and saw the wall (in a previous lifetime), and I remember reports of attempted escapes from the East, but I wouldn't have recognised a spy if I'd tripped over them, and I'm sure I did. I’m notoriously unobservant about the very obvious. Anyway, it did add to my enjoyment of this granddaddy of the genre.

"They walked to her flat through the rain and they might have been anywhere – Berlin, London, any town where pavingstones turn to lakes of light in the evening rain, and the traffic shuffles despondently through wet streets."

I like the writing – I have heard that some don't. It feels right for Leamas, the narrator, a broken man who has had enough… but where can he go from here?

"Control" wonders if he is up to doing one last double agent job before he comes in from the cold. Did he have metal fatigue, like an old airplane?

" 'I think you might make a lot of money out of it. You can have whatever you make.' 

'Thanks.'

'That is, of course, if you're sure you want to … no metal fatigue or anything?' 

'If it's a question of killing Mundt, I'm game.' 

'Do you really feel that?' Control enquired politely.

And then, having looked at Leamas thoughtfully for a moment, he observed: 'Yes, I really think you do. But you mustn't feel you have to say it. I mean, in our world we pass so quickly out of the register of hate or love – like certain sounds a dog can't hear. All that's left in the end is a kind of nausea; you never want to cause suffering again.' "

A story that begins with a battle-worn spy develops into a more human story on one side and a sadistic thriller on the other, with double agents wearing turncoats, if I can put it that way. It was hard to keep track of which bird was the cuckoo in which nest.

On a gossipy side note, I'll mention that in the book, the female lead is named "Liz" but she is "Nancy" in the film. I wondered if Burton's colourful relationship with Liz Taylor was the reason, and my 'research' says it was. 

I realise it's the third book in the George Smiley series, but I think there some others of John Le Carré's I'd like to try. Recommendations always welcome. 😊