Rating: 4/5

Well, that was a sad tale. Billie Holiday's autobiography ends with her using a mink coat as a blanket to keep her dog warm in a prison cell, and she died years later at the age of 44, handcuffed to her hospital bed with police guards posted outside - for a simple possession charge. The decades of pure hell the cops rained down on her just for being hooked on heroin really surprised me. These guys really hated the hell out of her. 

But then that's a big part of the story of jazz - Bud Powell suffering life-long neurological problems after being beaten by police. Miles Davis beaten bloody by police for not "moving along" when he was standing outside the club where he was playing, underneath the marquee with his name on it. Thelonious Monk unable to work in New York for many years because of a bullshit possession charge for drugs in a car he was in that probably weren't even his. 

Speaking of Miles Davis - Holiday has something in common with him: both of them had fathers who died relatively young because the doctors wouldn't treat them. In Davis's case, an ambulance wouldn't take his father to the hospital after he was hit by the train, even though he was one of the wealthiest businessmen and landowners in the state. In Holiday's case, the hospitals wouldn't admit him when he was sick in the cracker-ass South. 

So there it is - a great deal of this short memoir chronicles the all-too-common profound suffering of living as a member of a rejected and despised social group in the United States, where racism is the Original Sin that mars and threatens all of its accomplishments and ideals. 

It's a harrowing read, and the early pages especially dealing with her early childhood are almost unbearable, beginning with the first awful sentences: "Mom and Pop were just a couple of kids when they got married. He was eighteen, she was sixteen, and I was three." 

That she rose from these horrible conditions to become perhaps the greatest singer in the history of jazz is a mystery of the human spirit, though I wouldn't go so far as to call it an inspiration. 

This book is her own account of her life and times, pieced together from her ghostwriter based on conversations and interviews, and that's how it reads. It's not a worked-out autobiography, but a free-running series of memories and reflections. 

I would have liked a lot more detail on some of the key periods in her life, especially when she first found success as a musician. On one page she walks into a restaurant at the age of 15 and is amazed to find the room enchanted by her singing at an open mic, and a few pages later she's hanging out with Duke Ellington and Louis Armstrong, even though obviously a whole world lies between those two points. How did this woman with a fifth-grade education and no training at all work with professional musicians? How did she learn how to perform, how to get work? What was the personal journey like, meeting some of her great heroes and working alongside them? I would have loved much more on that - or anything, really. 

It's more like meeting a friendly celebrity at a party and them telling you a bunch of stuff, and her ghostwriter does not seem to have prompted her to fill in any of the missing pieces. We never learn about the notoriously abusive behavior of any of the men she's with, and she gives little detail on her drug use, other than the legal hassles she experienced. And sometimes you have to read between the lines, because she's giving her own account of how things seemed to her, and she's not always the most reliable interpreter. 

But if you want to learn more about Lady Day's life, here it is, in her own voice. It's clearly the key document in understanding that story.