Rating: 5/5

My parents' divorce wasn’t the most amicable one out there, although you wouldn’t know it because they’re pretty good friends now. At the time, my dad was living and working in Mexico as a surgeon, which meant that every other weekend found my brother and I listlessly cooped up in my dad’s clinic in Zaragoza, a very poor community on the outskirts of Juarez. People made their homes out of cinder blocks, durable cardboard, and any other supplies they could find. It was like night and day compared to where we lived. My dad’s common law wife would take charge of our weekends when my dad was working (which was most of the time), by zipping us all around Juarez—any basic American excursion like grocery shopping, grabbing a pizza, going to the movies or park, was so different, but nonetheless fun. 

Intermingled with that fun was the real fear that my dad wouldn’t take us back home. He had intimated as much to my mom during heated arguments before and after the divorce. It was a scary time to be a six-year-old, so my mom taught us how to memorize landmarks and phone numbers, even directions on how to get back to the international bridge, and what to tell authorities if my dad ever got a fit of the crazies. It never came to that, thank goodness, but films like Not Without My Daughter fascinated my grandparents, mom, brother and I. We could seriously relate to the fear of being trapped in another country against your will. 

That being said, last weekend I got an itch to arm chair travel to the Middle East, but couldn’t for the life of me find my copy of The Kite Runner, a book I’ve been avoiding since its publication. Upset but still wanting to read about a foreign experience, I picked up the book Not Without My Daughter, and didn’t put it down until I’d read the last page of the epilogue. Even if you’ve seen the movie, the book really is another experience! It was so amazing to get into Betty Mahmoody’s mind, to read about her fears and doubts, which she had to keep to herself, in order to buoy up her daughter, Mahtob. Although Alfred Molina plays the role of Betty’s abusive Iranian husband well in the film, reading this book really made me realize just how far gone her husband was in real life. Although a super intelligent and gifted doctor, he was a raving, abusive madman—an equally cunning adversary.

Most of the critical reviews of this book claim that Mahmoody is racist, intolerant of Islamic culture, and a liar. Reading certain passages, I can see why some would say that. However, just based on my own experiences, it’s practically impossible to take in another culture without relating it to your own, or what you know. As a Mexican American, there are a lot of things about Mexico that were/are foreign to me, even unattractive. I don’t think that means that I am racist. It’s just a different way of life that for me, took some getting used to. Culture shock within my culture, if you will. At any rate, I loved that Betty took the time to explain Muslim holidays and customs, foods and their preparations, rules of etiquette, and even bureaucratic governmental policies. I felt like I too was scuttling along the streets of Northern Tehran. How she finally escapes, and the sympathetic friends she meets along the way will make your heart soar. What a truly inspirational memoir!