Rating: 4/5

When Hitler Stole Pink Rabbit is yet another story belonging to the canon of Hitler and his atrocious Nazi regime. But what stands it apart is that it is a children's classic and it's written from the point of view of a young Jew refugee. Anna, age 9, is forced to flee Germany when the Nazis acquired power in Germany. Her father, a renowned author, had been highly critical of them and had written strongly against them, opposing them coming into power. But since the wind seems to blow in the Nazi's direction, he flees Germany and was soon joined by his family. Anna 9 and her brother 12, suddenly find them in strange countries, and though hard it may be, they must adapt as best they could for their new life as "refugees". 

This semi-autobiographic classic records author's experiences as a young girl of 9, who had to leave Germany with her family when the Nazis put her father, Alfred Kerr, an influential German critic of Jewish descent, in their top list of opponents. Their first home, as refugees, was Switzerland, then they settle in France, and finally in England, like that of Anna in the story. 

This story is not about the holocaust or the war. It is about the struggle of the fleeing Jewish refugees to cope with different cultures and lifestyles and to meet the ends under their diminished financial status. They had to live on their own skill and with the help of kind friends, having given most of their hard-earned valuables to the Nazis. And all because they are of Jewish origin! Yes, thanks to God that they have saved their lives, their most precious thing. Still, being displaced and living like gypsies is not easy as one may think. Wherever they go, they don't feel at home; they don't feel that they belong there; they feel their difference from the others. Then there is the other side of the coin. Living as "refugees" and being of "Jewish origin" they had to be patient, submissive, and endure all the slighting with swallowed indignation. This mindset is sincerely and sensitively portrayed by the author. 

When reading this I couldn't help comparing the story to present-day situations. After the second world war, despite numerous measures being taken to avoid such a catastrophe in the future, there had been other wars, the most recent being the situation in Ukraine. And many have had, and many are to this moment, changing their once proud status to the status of a refugee. How must they feel when suddenly they are deprived of all the things they held dear in life and robbed of their right to live peacefully in their beloved land? There is so much to ponder here.