Rating: 2/5

Oh boy. I had mixed warnings going into this book. I knew it was written by an acclaimed author, whose work I have admittedly never read before but who was high profile, highly rated by other readers, and had a slew of historical fiction titles to her name. On the other hand, I couldn’t help but notice the more critical reviews of this book, particularly from GoodReads friends whose judgment I usually credit and whose tastes tend to align with my own, expressing their disappointment. After reading it for myself, my response falls on the critical side of the scale.

I was honestly shocked at just how nasty every character is portrayed by McCullough. I had no idea it would be this bad. Priam is a greedy power-grabber, Leda and Tyndareus are deceitful hand-wringers, Helen is a selfish sybarite, Diomedes is a pushy cad, Odysseus is a heartless bastard… It just goes on and on and on. I almost hated to pick the book up because I dreaded which awful person I was going to be forced to sit on the shoulder of this time. Oh, except Achilles. Saint Achilles can do no wrong. Okay, I admit that this is my new pet peeve. I’ve been reading a lot of Trojan War novels lately, and in 2018 in particular there have been a whole host of them released. It’s striking how many of them go for the saintly Achilles depiction. I am not a fan of it. At the bare minimum, it’s overused and tired by this point. A more brutally honest assessment would be that “Saint Achilles” is a deeply anachronistic portrayal that wants to apply modern values where they don’t belong. This paragon of virtue falls in love with and has a real romance with Briseis and despises slavery – ignoring the fact that the original Briseis, as a war captive, was indeed a slave, the loot of war to Achilles, who objects over Agamemnon taking her merely because the latter has wounded his masculine honour by stealing a possession that was his. I’ve had enough of Saint Achilles, but this book makes it worse by not only making him ‘perfect’ but by making everyone else detestable.

Other reviewers have it spot on when they point out that all the POV chapters have the same voice. There’s nothing to distinguish Priam’s chapters from Helen’s chapters from Odysseus’ chapters. In fact, if I put the book down in the middle of a chapter, and came back to it a few days later, I forgot who was supposed to be narrating.

Aside from character butchery and indistinguishable narrators, the book is written competently, which I suppose it earns points for, but I feel myself having short shrift with this book if that’s all it has to offer. Decent writing isn’t enough to save it from its problems. And the fact that it is a pedestrian, low-effort retelling of the Trojan War counts against it when it sits among a profusion of other Trojan War novels; some of them are admittedly worse, but many are better.

4 out of 10