Rating: 5/5

I think this is the book I can call a REAL masterpiece. 

  OVERVIEW  
This book contains Fables. Each fable is different from the other and contains different moral. Author uses animals to convey his message. There are very few Fables in which he uses humans. But I didn't mind that fact. I just wanted a lesson. 
And I must praise author for such a great comparison between humans and animals. He has used an appropriate animal for a particular human characteristic. 
Overall this book contains almost every moral which we have or may face in the world.
Or most important thing this book is purely for children. It would be an excellent book for them. Because almost teenagers are aware of the morals which are given in this book. 

 P.S.  
After reading these Fables I don't think I am in the mood to read any more animals for a week or two. 

  SOME MORALS FROM THE BOOK I LIKED 
I liked almost every moral in this book but the following are little special for me.

♡A change of habits will not alter nature

♡There is a time for work and time for play

♡The laws of nature are unchangeable 

♡A fool may deceive by his dress and appearance, but his words will soon show what he really is

♡Set your sails with the wind

♡Ability proves itself by deeds

♡Always stop to think whether your fun may not be the cause of another's unhappiness

♡As long as you live, never judge the people by their looks

♡Don't stop to argue with temptation

♡You are judged by the company you keep

♡The true leader proves himself by his qualities

♡However unfortunate we may think we are there is always someone worse off than ourselves

♡Greatness has its penalties

♡Do not listen to the advice of him who seeks to lower you to his own level

♡It is unwise to treat old friends badly for the sake of new ones

♡Those who have plenty want more and so lose all they have

♡Learn from the misfortunes of others

♡Boast of one thing and you will be found lacking in that and a few other things as well

♡If you try to please all, you please none

♡Do not count your chickens before they are hatched

♡There is nothing worth so much as liberty

♡Do not let anything turn you from your purpose

♡Once a wolf, always a wolf

♡Do not tell others how to act unless you can set a good example

♡Misfortune is the test of true friendship

♡It is easy to be brave when there is no danger

Thanks for your attention! ^__^
1 December, 2016