Rating: 4/5

“Life is neither ugly nor beautiful, but it’s original.” p. 330

Original. That could be the best word to describe this book. Odd. Oddly daring. Frustrating. Frustratingly candid. Funny and poignantly sad also come to mind.

Published in Italy in 1923 when Svevo was 62 years old. It tells the perspective of aging Zeno who has numerous issues at hand. He tries to give up smoking, tries to deal with his father’s death, talks most unflattering about his marriage and his mistress and the sad business venture with his brother in law. All ending up with psychoanalysis. In short an autobiography.

The problem with Zeno is that he really had bad character flaws. He was very jealous, very conceited, a big baby, a hypochondriac, and very demanding. He falls in love with one woman, Ada, she rejects him, asks her sister Alberta, gets rejected, and settles with the third, Augusta. The fourth is a child so there was no more options. He maintains that he still loves Ada and even has an affair with another woman, Carla, just to prove... I am not sure. His love? His conceit? His womanizer abilities?

He goes into business with the Ada’s husband Guido, to stay close to her. Creepy. He also states that he is poor at business. The worst part is the brother in law is even worse at business. A truly disastrous outcome.

Several times I wondered about the man but then Zeno did something that I said, hold on. Maybe he isn’t so bad? In fact as the book carries on, Zeno himself changes and something “decent” comes out of him. 

Now the book has the oddest start. The doctor that helps Zeno with psychoanalysis, writes the Preface. He publishes the autobiography in revenge so that our dear Zeno can realize the lies and truths he has written about. Except Zeno notes that everyone lies, especially him. It’s true. Is it all a lie?

It’s other claim to fame is that James Joyce loved this book. Svevo knew Joyce when Joyce lived in Trieste, where the book takes place. He even gave Svevo an unfinished copy of Dubliners to proof. Perhaps there is a little of a Joycean literature in the character of Zeno?

In the end, I can applaud this book for being, for lack of a better word, original.

Maybe 3.5.