Rating: 4/5

"Finally the piano player took pity on me. He squashed out his cigarette, looked up at me, and said, 'Girl, can you sing?' "

Can she what. A unique voice, unlike any other. Anyone who's heard Billie Holiday sing will know exactly what I'm talking about. A mixture of raw pain &amp; sass. As is this book.

"You just feel it..."

I was obsessed with jazz in my late teens and early 20s, often frequenting The Basement, The Blue Note, Soup Plus &amp; The Harbourside Brasserie. Sadly all are now relics of my memories. Billie Holiday and Vince Jones were on constant rotation, which would be on as loud as I could play it. Yes, my neighbours were impressed I'm sure.

You cannot beat amazing music which contains layers of emotions and feelings in it. A couple of bars of jazz notes and you're exactly where you need to be. You know what it's saying. Add the talent of an incredible voice, and you're lost for hours.

Billie Holiday's voice was the perfect vehicle for jazz and blues, as you can hear she lived every single emotion she sang about. Her immaculate phrasing and intensity came from having experienced some harsh realities.

Her introduction to the world was a rocky one. Born Eleanora Fagan, her mother gave birth to her when she was only thirteen, her father fifteen. Even for those times, this was way too young.

Baltimore was a hard place to make ends meet. Billie's Dad left them to pursue his dream as a jazz musician (the irony). After serving in WWI, he figured he should do something that made him happy. Now a single Mum, Sadie headed north to New York, where she could earn better money working as a maid. Which meant leaving Billie to live for some years with her grandparents, where she received daily beatings from a vicious older cousin, and sexual assault from her cousin's son.

Abject poverty. Lack of a complete education. You could say Billie's life started on the back foot.

Once settled, Sadie sent for her daughter to join her in New York. And as fate would have it, Harlem called Billie. Where the jazz clubs and cool cats did their thing.

It was a fateful day when she walked down 133rd Street desperate to find work, so that she and her Mum wouldn't be evicted from their flat.

"It was jumping with after-hours spots, regular hour joints, restaurants, cafés, a dozen to a block."

The rest, as they say, was history.

You'll find out how Eleanora became Billie. And how she got her moniker Lady Day.

While I loved reading about the jazz greats she worked with, it was tough to read about the appalling treatment toward her not only as a woman, but a woman of colour. 

"You can be up to your boobies in white satin, with gardenias in your hair and no sugar cane for miles, but you can still be working on a plantation."

Not being able to walk through a hotel lobby. Having to walk through a kitchen door to go on stage. To sleep in a car or tour bus as no hotel would rent her a room. Likewise using the side of the road as a bathroom, as many times facilities weren't available to her. The segregation was tough to read about. And it wasn't all that long ago in the scheme of things. 

"Eating was a mess, sleeping was a problem, but the biggest drag if all was a simple little thing like finding a place to go to the bathroom."

Some of the jazz musos she worked with tried to stand up to "the system". To break the hypocrisy of loving the music but not the colour. Too often she'd have to leave the stage immediately on finishing a set.

Is it any wonder addictions beckon, to dull the pain and take the edge off.

"I had the white gowns and the white shoes. And every night they'd bring me the white gardenias and the white junk."

This book has very rough edges. It's raw. It's not a smooth read. Or a comfortable one. Human rights are brought into sharp focus. As are racism and sexism. But Billie's strength and sense of self are there on every page. There's no self pity. It is what it is. 

"It's like they say, there's no damn business like show business. You had to smile to keep from throwing up."

Among the tough stuff, there are moments of joy and humour. Her relationship with her Mum was special. I loved the open house her Mum had, cooking fried chicken at all hours of the day and night for Billie and her musician friends. 

Billie preferring to drink scotch over champagne (as champers "tasted funny"). Once at a party, thinking the champagne she was drinking was going to straight to her head, Billie was told that in fact a minor earthquake had taken place. That really amused me.

I'm taking off a star simply for her constant reference to other women as bitches. It began to grate. If you're familiar with my reviews, you'll know earworms (wordworms?) are my bugbear. And bitch was the earworm in this memoir. I've no idea if this is how she spoke in real life, or if this was a bit of artistic license on behalf of William Dufty who ghostwrote this with/for her.

Other than this gripe, Billie's memoir took me exactly where I wanted to be this weekend.

It ends with her musings about her hopes for the future. Kicking her habit. Being in love.

"Tired? You bet. But all that I'll soon forget with my man..."

Trigger warnings! Sexual assault and exploitation, rape, prostitution, domestic violence, racism, drug and alcohol abuse.

"It must be love - say what you choose
I gotta right to sing the blues."
- Vocals: Billie Holiday
- Lyrics &amp; music: Ted Koehler and Harold Arlen

Listen to Billie Holiday sing "I Gotta Right To Sing The Blues" on YouTube. It never loses its vibrancy.
https://youtu.be/AULNpnLhesc