Rating: 3/5

This is a novel written by Nobel winner Cela in 1953. I’ve read several of this Spanish author’s works including Christ versus Arizona (which is brilliant), Pascual Duarte and Boxwood but each are very different in style as is this novel again.

Well Mrs Caldwell is the English mother of Eliacim who has died a while ago (not clear but possibly in WW2 or at least between the world wars). She is writing a sort of diary of her thoughts as she ponders her relationship with her now grown son. The book has about 200 pages with about 200 short chapters, each with a descriptive heading. She is going mad and the basic suggestion (though not clear since this is definitely not a simple narrative story, but in my view) is because of her guilt in having had incestuous thoughts about him since he was a boy. Each chapter is basically a thought picture with little connectivity with the others as Caldwell brings to mind Eliacim’s possible loves, his career in the navy (he dies aboard ship and is buried at sea), objects that spark a memory, avoids but alludes to her inappropriate behaviours and so on. There is a possible thread of ideas associated with water, wood of coffins, sin, time and her own youth. I was always looking for clues or facts which would comprise a story such as how long after his death she was writing, when and how he died, what she might really have done to him but none of this is clear to me and I guess that was the intention of the writer. The work is so surreal one could imagine allsorts of metaphors and allusions. We do however have a final few chapters and postscript detailing her ultimate end. The final section is the author’s own preface to the original story detailing philosophical and his Boolean logic ideas in constructing the story. The basic style is fundamentally disjointed though still very readable overall.

I was somewhat amazed at the apparent coincidence that only having just finished reading Confession of Zeno by Svevo, chapter 34 mentions the original Greek Zeno and the next chapter has ‘suicide by Veronal’ which is a significant episode in Svevo’s novel – I wonder if Cela was deliberating referencing this famous 1923 work?

OK here are some quotes:

“As long as an heroic and almost revolutionary step is not taken, I’ll go on bound to the rack of being unable to decide for myself in which day of the week I’m living, and in which day of the week I want to live”

“At other times, on the other hand, I think that I have my left breast in my head, and that my fencing master is going to put out my eyes”

“You my son, when you were a little child, lived in constant fear, your eyes inhabited by atrocious and permanent inexplicable fears”

“he was, from all appearances, officially nice, although I think that his niceness did not exceed a relative, although without doubt very plausible, niceness”

“a river, Eliacim, is always a little bit the memory of a horrible crime, of a crime committed on the little girl with swollen features who was strolling darkly though the narrowest and most lonely streets of the city.”

“Decisive steps, my son, leave no trace: the pact with the devil is as aseptic as a well equipped operating room”

Overall I definitely think this is the least enjoyable of the 3 other Cela novels above. I suppose (although I can appreciate the style) I just wanted some guidance or detail as to what had really happened between her and her son. So though a good read I’ll score modestly.