Rating: 5/5

RIP, John le Carré, 12/13/20, at 89. 

4/29/2026: Rereading all of the George Smiley books in 2026. This is one of the great ones, subtle, restrained, some people say it is too slow, but it builds so well, is so well-written. Smiley says in an afterword that this was the last innocent book he wrote, as he had written the first two Smiley books in relative obscurity and they were largely ignored, and in the process of writing this book too he was unknown, but then it and he became an international sensation, and his life was changed forever. He was henceforth always writing in the public eye, reviewed everywhere, with greater and greater scrutiny, which is, as he says, every writer's dream, and their nightmare as well. 

In this rereading I like the focus on one guy, Alec Leamas, a British intelligence officer, being sent to East Germany as a faux defector to sow disinformation about a powerful East German intelligence officer. One spy and his travails, taking its sweet time; it is good, and then it creeps up on you, becomes great literary fiction, a character study and a look inside the espionage business that le Carré knows from having lived it, and then what we think we know changes dramatically and the action ramps up, the pace is terrific, and we have this gut-wrenching conclusion.

The book arose out of le Carré's moral malaise about the making of the Berlin Wall and the Cold War and western espionage methods in contradiction with democratic principles. It is bleak and powerful.

12/14/2017: I had read this in the early seventies and had beeb expecting something like James Bond, but discovered something far richer and darker, not "just" a spy novel but a beautifully written novel about the state, about British intelligence, with no heroes. In the manner of Graham Greene, who also wrote spy books, and said it was the best spy novel he had ever read. To me that is some powerful endorsement, as Greene is one of the best writers I have ever read.

I reread this in order to see again the 1965 film adaptation with Richard Burton, Claire Bloom and Oskar Werner, also a classic.