Rating: 5/5

A re-read of The Green Mile on my journey to reading all of SK's book in publication order and it's still a 5 star read. 

I feel like I say this a lot but this is one of my favourite SK books. I did see the film before I read the book and although the film is super accurate to the book, the book is 100% worth the read. There are some difference between the film and the book and somehow the book is even sadder. If this book doesn't make you shed a tear then you must be pretty hardcore. 

The main reason why the books hit so hard is because of Jon Coffey and Paul's relationship, they couldn't be much more opposite, one condemned to death and the other man pulling the switch. Their relationship starts to blossom as soon as they meet and in another world/life maybe they would have been best friends. SK is a master with words and the way these characters interact is masterful. I have to talk about Percy to, one of the best written villain's King has ever created and it's not because he's the evilest or most sick villain but because we all know a Percy. Percy is sleezy, nasty and has short man syndrome he does so pretty awful things, he is a bully. 

This is a horror so expect some horrifying moments it isn't as gruesome as other SK books or creepy but it's scary in it's own way. You can't help thinking about your own soul and mortality while reading this book. The death penalty is something very scary to me, Dell's execution in particular sticks in my mind. I remember the first time I watched the film I couldn't stop thinking about Dell. 

I think Paul narrating this as an old man is such a nice format, it shows that he's never forgot his time on The Green Mile and never will. I do think the flicking back to Paul's future self could be annoying for some readers, but for me it gave me a break from the horrors of The Green Mile. This book is full of regret and admiration it's bleak, harsh and so powerful. It's a deep delve into what is right and wrong and when the line it blurred. The book has quite a different ending to the film and it's so sad. I will of course mention Mr Jingles a mouse that SK gives so much personality, not a word was uttered by him but he is a main character somehow. 

A SK book that is imprinted in my mind, if you want to give SK a try but aren't a big fan of being too scared I think this is the way to go. I don't believe anyone has ever regretted reading this book.