Rating: 3/5

Published in 1969, the short book is an interesting read because it offers a peek into Tolkien analysis while the man himself was still alive, and before the Silmarillion was finished. That means that the references in the analysis are more from Tolkien’s contemporaries and less from Tolkien experts that arose the next half-century. It also means that the analysis is unburdened by the lens of Peter Jackson’s trilogy, which, although wonderfully executed, has undeniably changed the understanding of Tolkien’s work.

Another point in its favor is providing some analysis from Lin Carter. While Carter is not a memorable author, he was instrumental in bringing fantasy to the popular eye in his work with Ballantine Books (the US paperback publisher of Tolkien). Through his curation of fantasy tales after Tolkien, he helped enliven the fantasy genre in a time when it was under appreciated. Many of the titles Carter lists as inspiration to Tolkien are also books he helped get published again in the US.

The downside of the publishing timing is that the analysis is much less comprehensive than any of the later analyses. The inspirations, naming, real world sources, and so on have likely all been heard by a modern Tolkien fan before. And with how short the book is, it feels much more like an extended introduction than a full-fledged analysis (excepting the summarization of the Hobbit and LOTR, which seems needless for anyone reading an analysis of the tale).

Some time is spent on theories on things that today are known, such as looking at evidence to suggest that Gandalf was an Odin archetype, king of the gods, and that we would find him to be a Valar when the Silmarillion eventually came out. To me, this added to the charm due to publication timing, but it is rather meaningless analysis nowadays as we know precisely what Gandalf is. 

One final thing that I feel is a missed opportunity: any time with Tolkien while he was alive to confirm any of the theories proposed here. While Tolkien was known to be crotchety to anyone he presumed to be too big a fan, the biggest advantage of the timing was hearing more while he was alive, and mostly that chance was missed.