Rating: 3/5

Mar 8, 8pm ~~ Review asap. Have some music to listen to and a little other research to do first.

Mar 11, 2pm ~~ I discovered Billie Holiday when I bought a cassette tape of her greatest hits through a book club I was in at the time. I still have that cassette but it is pretty worn out these days. I knew only a bit about her life; really all I knew was that her voice and the way she sang touched me deeply. I could tell she felt every song in her soul.

I have had this book in my project pile for biographies and memoirs for a couple of years and I'm glad that I finally read it, but I was not able to give it more than three stars, which means just what GR says it means. I liked the book but I was not wowed by it. 

But why not? If I am so moved by her singing, why was I not as moved by the book that tells of her struggles in life, of the background that created her? Her early years were certainly crazy rough, and many of the others were too. She had a thing for the wrong type of man, she liked to party hard. She had lots of issues and these pages touch on them all. 

The book was actually written by William Dufty. Quoting from Wiki:
Holiday's autobiography, Lady Sings the Blues, was ghostwritten by William Dufty and published in 1956. Dufty, a New York Post writer and editor then married to Holiday's close friend Maely Dufty, wrote the book quickly from a series of conversations with the singer in the Duftys' 93rd Street apartment. He also drew on the work of earlier interviewers and intended to let Holiday tell her story in her own way. In his 2015 study, Billie Holiday: The Musician and the Myth, John Szwed argued that Lady Sings the Blues is a generally accurate account of her life, but that co-writer Dufty was forced to water down or suppress material by the threat of legal action.

I felt so sorry for Billie and the things she endured. Learning about her life was not necessarily an enjoyable read: it was painful to see the way her life played out. And I wonder just how much of this book is Dufty. How much of Lady Day's 'own way' did he really get on paper? There would be no way to know without talking to Billie herself. 

She may remain a mystery to me even after I read the other books I have ordered. But a mystery can be loved without being solved. She speaks to me in her songs. God Bless The Child, she will live forever.