Rating: 5/5

When I want to be reminded of great writing, I just start reading a Pat Conroy book. His books are also reminders of the potential for evil and good in all people, the importance of knowing where you're from, and the fact that they just don't write books the way they used to. (Apologies to all contemporary writers.)

The late Conroy (he died in 2016) was a true Son of the South, and, occasionally in his writing, he was proud of the fact. More than anything, a recurring theme in his books is making the best out of what you're given. He was all about making lemonade if given a pile of shit.

Starting with his iconic enigmatic yet beautiful first sentence: "My wound is geography.", Conroy's novel "The Prince of Tides" takes the reader on an emotional journey to the South Carolina lowcountry, where we meet the extremely dysfunctional Wingo family.

The novel actually opens in present day (well, 1986, anyway, when the book was published) when Tom Wingo hears news of his twin sister, Savannah's, latest suicide attempt in New York City. Tom, despite his hatred of NYC and the fact that his marriage is falling apart, leaves to travel north to find out if he can save his sister from herself and, in the process, maybe save himself.

The novel is told almost entirely in flashbacks. We see the three Wingo children---Luke, Tom, and Savannah---as they grow up in a tempestuous household with a physically abusive drunk father and an obtuse mother who seems to care more about her standing in the community than her own children. The harsh truth---and something that Tom realized early on---is that the Wingo family was nothing more than poor white trash. What made it seemingly worse was that they were poor white Southern trash, which was, apparently, worlds worse than regular poor white trash.

Despite this fact, Tom loves his family, even his asshole father. Tom is far more intelligent than he gives himself credit for, and he realizes that every member in his family are the way they are because that is all they were ever expected to be.

Savannah, the smartest and most rebellious member of the family, realized this too. Thinking that she broke away from her turbulent upbringing, she moved as far away from South Carolina as possible and became a reknowned poet. Unfortunately, she couldn't quite escape the mental trappings of her childhood and the horribly traumatic events that have plagued the Wingo family.

Something devastatingly horrible happened to the Wingo family; something that no one has talked about for decades. Indeed, they are forbidden to talk about it, for bullshit reasons that none of them fully understand. When Tom comes to NYC and meets Savannah's gorgeous psychiatrist, Dr. Lowenstein, he is forced to confront this past.

Don't be intimidated by both the subject matter and the length. It's 700+ pages, but it won't feel like it. And, even though the book deals with some triggering topics such as child abuse, suicide, and extreme violence, Conroy somehow keeps the book's tone hopeful and lighthearted. Much of it stems from Conroy's sense of humor and his amazing ability to create absolutely lovable characters.

It's an absolute travesty that Conroy never received a Pulitzer in his lifetime. Then again, even after nearly a decade after his death, his books are still being read (and re-read) and loved by millions of readers, which is probably more substantial to authors than a prize.

8/27/2025 addendum: I finally saw the 1991 film adaptation starring, and directed by, Barbra Streisand. (https://www.google.com/search?sca_esv...) It's worth watching, if only for an outstanding performance by Nick Nolte. Streisand managed to film a lot of the great scenes in Conroy's novel, but there was still a lot missing. To be fair, any director would have had a hard time shoving every idea Conroy tackled in his book into a movie and keeping it under 6 hours long. Maybe someday, someone will adapt this into a limited-run TV show.