Rating: 1/5

Damn, I wish I could remember who recommended this to me so I can kick their ass.

The book started off promising, and actually captivating. Exploring the nature and ethics of synchronicities and laying out the cultural changes and discussing landmark books along the way. 

One thing I found interesting was how Redfield believes that explicitly acknowledging the spiritual currents' synchronicity and talking about it will further entrench you in the world of synchronicity. My intuition has been that the spiritual currents are best fostered when not spoken of, as it feels like you’re taking advantage of it, which is immoral and thus reduces "its" generosity to you. 

The book however was a major disappointment when I realized Redfield was not a serious thinker nor did not go into any topic deeply. More, he treats the reader as gullible, and frankly stupid, an instance of this is when he warns that the "internet may be a place of misinformation as anyone can edit it," and says that yogis can levitate, without expecting the reader to want any proof.

There isn't really any substance here. I wish Redfield could stick to just a summarization of cultural change as he has a fairly good grip on it. But hearing Redfield's own ideas was uncompelling. Who is this guy, anyway? He's not a serious thinker. He writes as if he and the reader are not very intelligent, isn't very coherent, and has a very simple answer to every major world challenge: "to live synchronistically," which, by the way, is an interesting idea in itself, the idea that you build an ethic of meaningful coincidences, and I wish the book was a serious discussion about, rather it was just superficial.

This is a feel-good book and it is intellectually hiding behind the vagueness of overused concepts such as "energy" and "synchronicity." This is the type of book that see no problems deriving personal ethics from a simple understanding of quantum physics.

From his writing, Redfield didn't gain any authority from me - and I was wondering, who is this guy anyway? Seems like he doesn't feel the need to qualify himself as he's written a successful fictional book.