Rating: 5/5

Racism, capital punishment, and healing magic are a trifecta match made on death row

A grain of white magic
Of about a potion of a few percent given to the most important ingredient, characterization, and everything runs just so much more smoothly. That´s another King trademark, to never go the epic, high fantasy road with loads of big, badass superpowers with rock paper scissors dynamic, but with just a Shining, psi power, or some special medical treatment skills that give the little extra bonus to a great story. Less is so often more and demonstrating how the soft magic influences the magician, witch, or demon and the people confronted with her/him/it, how perception and world view change in other characters and how everything slowly accelerates towards total escalation, is always a hell of a ride.

Coffey lets Paul stay up all night
The main focus is on the interaction and developing relationship of these 2 very different characters, a disillusionized jailer and the gentle giant. The other inmates, colleagues, and the double homicide backstory are just the instigators to get Paul more and more obsessed about what´s really going on with Coffey, both regarding his case and himself as a person, while some, once good, magical realism is making the whole thriller background plotline even more mysterious.

Death penalty and evil inherent flaws of retributive justice
A restorative justice system without killing, hopefully guilty, criminals, wouldn´t have made such an incomparable monument of the shoals of human made systems, and King criticizes the heck out of this escalating, greed driven, not big history vivisected, system called American justice system. No other democratic country combined, or to a certain extent could because they hadn´t enough poor, discriminated groups of people in their own population, neoliberal turbo capitalistic privatization of military industrial prison complexes fed by the legislation that runs on lobbyism, corruption, and neoconservatism, with eliminating close to all free social and welfare services to forever feed the moloch with the fresh souls of the ones who have no other option than to be criminal or live and die young in poverty. 

Reasons for that
American history and the current system could be seen as a continuation of the triangular trade with extra steps, one could certainly make interesting graphics including the new big players and masterminds behind it, including historical, sociological, political, and economic legitimations. But that would need objective, big history research no one is interested in because it could awake the extremely expensive monster of compensation for Africans, native Americans, and all the others enslaved, killed, and suppressed people from Columbus to the wild west until the 21st century. That´s nothing elites are interested in.

It´s no problem that it wasn´t meant to be a real book, but just a serial novel
Kings´ ingenuity makes it seem as if it´s one piece, never intentioned to be published part by part, and one bonus of this writing method is that there are even more cliffhangers than in an average novel, because there had to be a bigger hook at each end. Maybe it even wouldn´t have been that good if King would have written another, normal story without this new convention. 

Racism and the prison system
King doesn´t directly point the finger at this problem, but just the fact that a not guilty black guy is killed for the crime of another  could be seen as a metaphor. Just as with his story Hope Springs Eternal culminating in the epic The Shawshank Redemption, King is dealing with the inhumanity, madness, and injustice of many draconic, hellhole prison unjustice systems, focusing on poverty, hate, and the third, most underrated justice that tends to be forgotten for dogmatic and economic reasons, distributional justice with a focus on racism. With free health care and education, and strong social services, most of this suffering could, just as in Europe, easily be avoided.

Tropes show how literature is conceptualized and created and which mixture of elements makes works and genres unique: 
https://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.ph...