Rating: 5/5

Truth in the title: the title tells us exactly the plot of the novel. 

A man is stabbed to death. He’s a fairly wealthy young man (he’s 21) who runs a cattle ranch inherited from his father. There’s an interesting ethnic twist: His father’s family speaks Arabic at home and his family's housekeeper on occasion calls him “white man.” Although the locals call his family ‘Turks,’ because they are Catholic, it’s likely they were Lebanese and arrived in Colombia (where the story is set) from the great mixing and melting pot of the Caribbean. 

The title tells us all we need to know and very early on in the story we know why he was killed, so I’m not giving away any plot. Another wealthy man in town has just had the most extravagant wedding ever seen in the town. But the next morning the bridegroom ‘returns the bride’ to her family because she has been deflowered by the young man who will then be killed by her two brothers. 

The day of the murder the brothers make no secret of their intentions. They wander around town telling people what they intend to do. By mid-morning just about everyone in town has heard them say they will kill him. 

So why is nothing done? Everyone has an excuse. There’s a big commotion in town because the bishop is coming by riverboat to wave at folks and give the town a blessing. So even the priest thinks ‘this is a criminal matter that doesn’t concern me.' Most folks assume it’s just ‘drunk talk.' The mayor has the police chief take away their hog butchering knives when they are seen sharpening them. (But they have plenty of knives.) Also it’s assumed they are talking to so many folks that someone will stop them --- and maybe they want to be stopped.

The story is told retrospectively from almost 30 years later. A fascinating read that under the author’s masterful writing, makes the entire story perfectly plausible. “We killed him openly,” Pedro Vicario said, "but we’re innocent.”

A good read. 

Small town in Colombia from arrangedtravelers.com
Photo of the author from npr.com