Rating: 5/5

5 ⭐

  ”The universe is the Great All, and offers a paradox too great for the finite mind to grasp. As the living brain cannot conceive of a nonliving brain – although it may think it can – the finite mind cannot grasp the infinite.”

Stephen King’s The Gunslinger, the first in the ‘Dark Tower’ series, published in 1982, is a dark, gritty mescaline-trip through a Dream Fantasy/Horror mashup in which an Old-Western Style Pistolero, Clint Eastwood (Roland), pursues an enigma known as Will Smith (The Man in Black), through the harsh landscape of a desolate world which one could be forgiven for believing was the decaying husk of our own planet. At first, hyper-focused on the Gunslinger’s quest, King exposes the reader to this strange setting, in which time seems to have lost its meaning, once familiar language is forgotten, and the inhabitants have become deranged and warped due to a strange, uneasy force pushing and pulling on their emotions, encouraging them to indulge their most carnal impulses. During his pursuit, Roland meets a young New-Yorker by the name of Jake and the majority of the book is focused on their journey, the fluctuating dynamic between the two in relation to the Man in Black and some light fleshing-out of the Gunslinger’s past. This is all great, but where the book transcends your average run-of-the-mill Fantasy is a point in which, without saying too much, the narrow scope of the tale explodes into something far greater. Seemingly out of nowhere, the gritty, gun totin’, dreamy dystopian tale is flipped on its head, breaking the chains of its simple, meandering narrative and revealing King’s ‘astronomical’ ambition for what I hope will be a remarkable and wholly original series.

This book is not all that popular with those in my friends list and going through their reviews there are a number of justifiable reasons why, but I think the number one reason is this. People generally like their books, even those within a series, to be self-contained. That is, to have a story that, while potentially leaving some questions unanswered, still has a satisfying conclusion in its own right. ‘The Gunslinger’ doesn’t have that in the typical sense. The Final Act really elevated this story, don’t get me wrong, but almost nothing comes full circle. You are given critical information, but it only leads to more questions.

  ”Few if any seemed to have grasped the truest principle of reality: new knowledge leads always to yet more awesome mysteries.”

I don’t think this can be fully enjoyed without the predetermined intention of continuing on with the series, as a large part of the excitement that comes with finishing this instalment is the wonder of what is to come. This is, essentially, a 238 page prologue in which you can dip your toes and get a feel for the World. It is in no way a stand-alone.

Furthermore, quite a few people mentioned that the story was strange (it 100% is) and they had no idea what was going on half the time. This is valid, in the sense that for the entire length of the novel you have far too few puzzle pieces to even begin attempting to put together but, on the other hand, I thought the plot was pretty straightforward. If you can manage to let go of the need for something tangible and concrete to anchor to within the narrative and just allow yourself to drift tranquilly , observing the interactions, moment to moment, poco a poco, you’ll have a much better time with this. Of course, individual tolerance for this will vary.

  ”The greatest mystery the universe offers is not life but size. Size encompasses life, and the Tower encompasses size.”

‘The Shining’ is the only other book by Stephen King that I had read prior to this one and, while I enjoyed both, the writing style of the two couldn’t be less alike. One thing they do have in common is fantastic characterisation. It’s not just the main protag and antag that burst forth from the page but many of the non-essential “NPCs” too. There are so many memorable and disturbing characters, it’s almost a shame that you pass by some of them so briskly. Alice and her insatiably “restless groin”, Kennerly the toothless, “scrawny rooster” of a man who lay with his own daughters, Nort the undead-like behemoth, resurrected through the infectiously joyous act of salivary spit-roast/phlegm facial. Vulgar? Yes. Memorable? Absolutely! The dialogue between Roland and these characters can be, at any given time, hilarious, grotesque, tense or emotional, but always of a high quality and captivating to read.

Fate, Time, Language, Love and Sexual Desire are all recurring themes that lend the story a bizarre and mysterious foreboding along with the niggling feeling that you’re always just slightly out of the loop with what’s going on. This mystery is crafted with the subtlety of a master author and is largely responsible for the palpable atmosphere felt throughout the novel. A strange, uneasy and unnatural sensuality permeates the world as can be observed through the knee-buckling, bottom-lip-biting, eyes-roll-to-the-back-of-the-head intense desire that Alice has for Roland, Roland for Sylvia and later the Oracle/Succubus for Roland. The source of this is alluded to but never made entirely clear. Love, without going into specifics, can be viewed in the same manner. You’re never quite sure if it’s natural or a result of some outside force acting on the characters.

  ”I have not forgotten my father’s face; it has been with me through all.”

In describing more about the atmosphere of the novel, my fellow video-gamers are going to be at an advantage here. As I was reading, I couldn’t help but take note of, what I believe to be, the heavy inspiration that ‘From Software’ have drawn from King’s ‘Dark Tower’ in the creation of their infamously difficult, but highly addicting video game, ‘Bloodborne’. The Hunters are very much akin to Gunslingers and the landscape is, in both cases, one in which the “world has moved on”, leaving the inhabitants warped, deranged, and under the influence of a corrupt, cult-like religion. Add to this a dash of The Last of Us, a sprinkle of The Witcher, season with Red Dead Redemption and garnish with your preferred choice of textbooks on Astrophysics and Quantum Mechanics and you’ve got… Well, an awfully inaccurate description of what this novel is about. Helpful? I presume not.

I’ve been advised to go straight into ‘The Drawing of the Three’ without delay, so I will be doing so. If it’s half as good as this one, I’ll be a happy reader! Thanks to Kevin for inspiring me to drop everything and pick this one up!

  ”… three is mystic. Three stands at the heart of your quest. Another number comes later. Now the number is three.”