Rating: 4/5

What a marvelous spy thriller this is! I can see why it's considered such a classic.

I'm late to the John le Carré book party, but I've been enjoying my time here so far. I loved his memoir The Pigeon Tunnel, and I thought his novel Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy was brilliant. When his latest book, A Legacy of Spies, was released and got positive reviews, I decided to go back and catch up on the George Smiley series.

Smiley plays a minor role in The Spy Who Came in from the Cold, but it doesn't matter because Alec Leamas is such a compelling character. We follow Leamas as he gets involved in a tangled revenge plot against a powerful East German agent. There are a lot of twists and turns, which I won't spoil. I had seen the movie version starring Richard Burton, but I enjoyed the book more because it got deeper into the mindset of Leamas. 

Highly recommended for fans of spy novels.

Favorite Quotes
"He knew then what it was that Liz had given him; the thing that he would have to go back and find if ever he got home to England; it was the caring about little things — the faith in ordinary life; the simplicity that made you break up a bit of bread into a paper bag, walk down to the beach and throw it to the gulls. It was this respect for triviality which he had never been allowed to possess; whether it was bread of the seagulls or love, whatever it was he would go back and find it." 

"What do you think spies are: priests, saints, and martyrs? They’re a squalid procession of vain fools, traitors too, yes; pansies, sadists, and drunkards, people who play cowboys and Indians to brighten their rotten lives. Do you think they sit like monks in London balancing the rights and wrongs? I’d have killed Mundt if I could, I hate his guts; but not now. It so happens that they need him. They need him so that the great moronic mass that you admire can sleep soundly in their beds at night. They need him for the safety of ordinary, crummy people like you and me." 

"A man who lives apart, not to others but alone, is exposed to obvious psychological dangers. In itself, the practice of deception is not particularly exacting; it is a matter of experience, of professional expertise, it is a facility most of us can acquire."