Rating: 4/5

Fascinating! Truly, fascinating! I picked up this little gem at a used book store in 2024. It was written in 1969 just about the time that Lord of the Rings was taking off as a huge must-read hit. I wasn't sure what to expect, and the first few chapters, being just as a summary of The Hobbit and The Lord of the Rings, were not particularly enlightening, and were, in fact, prone to error (Eowyn, for example is listed as Theoden's daughter, not his niece, or as stated in the book, his "sister-daughter")

But one may forgive such small errors, for the complete study of LOTR was only in its infancy and, in fact, The Silmarillion had not yet been published, so there is a *very* interesting set of guesses and hypotheses in here that don't quite pan out with what we now know.

But the truly fascinating part, to me, was the absolutely comprehensive study of all of the literary sources which led to JRRT writing LOTR. I was floored to learn that, for the most part, not a single name came from his own imagination, not for people, nor places, nor things. The last half of the book ranges over thousands of years of literature, from Gilgamesh through Beowulf and Shakespeare, from Homer to Virgil to the writers of the 1920s. It was like an AP English class all rolled into 100 pages, and from it I learned so many things about where myths began and how they have been recycled again and again in different forms in different places. 

On the one hand it was somewhat dispiriting to think that Professor Tolkien hadn't made up everything in his story whole-cloth. On the other hand, he did something remarkable in that he more-or-less single-handedly revitalized the popularity of "fantasy stories". I once thought he had *invented* the genre, but this book proves that is wildly inaccurate. If you love LOTR and really want a look into where it all came from, read this.

Oh, final note: because this was written before the publication of The Silmarillion, the author hypothesizes the following, and/or concludes it solely from the Appendices of LOTR:

- Galdalf is a Valar (false: he is a Maiar, but that term did not come until The Silmarillion)

- The island if Numenor was in existence from the beginning of the world (false: it was raised out of the sea to serve as reward/home to the Men who helped the Elves overthrow Morgoth)