Rating: 5/5

This book delves into the emerging approach to spirituality that humankind is currently living and proves that those mystical experiences that were once laughed at can now be explained by science and are more ubiquitous than before. Synchronicity, the power of being in the present, premonitions, gut-feelings and intuitive behavior are just one of the few spiritual experiences Redfield explores. Not only science has been able to testify these are not the happenings of fools or dishonest hawkers but are real episodes that are becoming more and more common. Years ago, it was impossible to talk about spirituality without being called a crazy misfit. Now, with the surge of technology, persons from all around the world are able to share their experiences as well as draw reoccurring similarities and what triggered them. Therefore, we're reaching a new spiritual awareness as we finally understand that the materialistic overview of life is no longer valid in the times we're living.

This book discusses synchronistical events (living two or more events that are apparently causally unrelated occurring together in a meaningful way) and it's funny that I came to have it in my own hands exactly through a series of acausal events: I landed on a blog containing a list of the 10 most influential spiritual books of our times according to the writer. I noticed quickly that I had read most of them. Nonetheless, the cover of one particular book struck me in the eye. It was almost as if it was more luminous than any other (luminosity is another topic Redfield explores throughout "The Celestine Vision"): it was "The Celestine Prophecy". I was magnetically attracted to it. I quickly called my local bookstore and was told that the novel wasn't available but that they had gotten just that day "The Celestine Vision" which condenses the philosophy in "TCP" without its plot and fictional elements. Clearly, this string of events was no coincidence at all… Then, I later read about synchronicity on Redfield's publication and came to find out it's not a myth and it's actually an idea that has been explored by several psychologists such as Carl Jung.

I took "The Celestine Vision" to my end of the year beachtrip and I have to say it was the best companion I could find out. Not only it helped me analyze 2010 but also gave me so much insight about what my goals should be and how to pursue them. Most importantly, it made me realize I sometimes gather my energy from other individuals by engaging into control dramas. It was a truly revealing read. I totally recommend this book to any person willing to improve his life through spirituality.