Rating: 3/5

In terms of writing style, The Song of Troy was stiff. 

Just to be positive: some of the things I did find interesting, and not offensive or just ???????? were:

A) an Achilles with no lips. None. Is there a reference I’m missing? Either way, strange but I’m down.
B) Achilles’ death fits that are almost epileptic, and lend a strong foundation behind his desire for honour as he’s constantly reminded of his doom. Coolio!
C) this book covers the years leading up to The Iliad, and in doing so pulls in lesser known myths, which is always fun.

Honestly, when I realized McCullough planned on completely throwing away the last 7 books of the Iliad in favour of grossly oversimplifying Achilles’ rage and grief over Patroclus and his relationship with both him and Briseis, I started skimming pretty hard. Also, can we give Briseis a broader personality outside of virginal, naive maiden? 

And I mean, come on, this Achilles is respectful to Hector’s corpse? Apologizes to him? Where’s the pizazz. 

I’ve said this before, and I’ll probably end up saying it a billion times more, but why, why, why do so many contemporary authors continuously try to fabricate a star-crossed lovers plot between Achilles and Briseis? He wishes her dead multiple times in the original poem! That is not cute! Achilles’ violent disregard for Briseis can so easily be juxtaposed against the likes of Hector’s love for Andromache, or Menelaus’ attempts to get Helen back, as a means to show just how far Achilles has fallen in his grief. A husband is not supposed to crassly throw his bride away, while stating how he hopes her captor will rape her, honour or no honour! A husband IS supposed to chase after her and protect her, whether he loves her or not! How about we give Briseis a man who treats her right! 

I know people have been giving their own take on The Iliad, since the poem was first orally produced, so technically there are no wrong answers. That doesn’t mean there can’t be completely ridiculous answers that make me want to drive my head into a wall because again, why.

3 stars because The Song of Troy is not awful, but the flat characterization and incongruous plot was disappointing.