Rating: 2/5

It hit me with a certain amount of force yesterday that I'd read eight books by William S. Burroughs between July and November of 2012 and zero in the entirety of 2013 and 2014. What had happened to the young rebel? Had he calmed? Dare we say he made peace with the world?

Well, it was a slow realization, but here's the essence of the problem: William S. Burroughs was not a great writer. An interesting one? Definitely. An influential one? I'll go along with that. A key part of shaping my tastes in literature? Oh, you'd better believe it. I'll ride with you as far as saying he was a good one, or at the very least good at writing from a surreal fever pitch. Not to mention his rock-star mystique, his brutal honesty, his de facto status as America's spokesperson for outsiders and weirdos of the world, the sick pleasure I once took in people's disgusted reactions to him and his work... yes, it's easy to see why I was so into this guy at one point.

Yet, looking at him two years and a few months out from the height of my Burroughs thing? Dude wasn't a great writer. He just wasn't. He had one great book in him and a couple of good ones, but he was not a great writer, and Soft Machine proves why: after he wrote Naked Lunch, he just never stopped rehashing it. The Wild Boys gives you a bit of a break from it and is probably his second-best novel as a result, but look, I mean, when book after book after book of nightmare drugs and weird sex and centipede attacks just all blend together, and you can put it in space and justify it however you want with the "he was awfully avant-garde wasn't he," but look, if we count the insubstantial parlor trick Dead Fingers Talk, Burroughs went back to the same crazy-ass hallucinations well four consecutive times after Naked Lunch. Four! Maybe even five, depending on what the Last Words of Dutch Schultz is like, maybe even six because the Wild Boys is coming from the same place as well. Nova Express gets a pass out of artistic laziness because it has a unique kinetic energy to it, but otherwise, I just have to wonder why the hell he never did anything else. Unless you count Junky and Queer, which are valuable as insights into repressed and despised communities but aren't wonderful as pieces of writing. 

I remember thinking as I read this that maybe it was a Naked Lunch rehash, but at the time I brushed it off. Now that realization is back in full force. But hey, I've got Port of Saints and Exterminator! on my shelf right now, and if I know myself, I'll probably read them before this year's out. Burroughs is an invaluable gateway to the postmodern thing, and Naked Lunch can't be denied, but there comes the point where we all must say goodbye to old heroes.