Rating: 4/5

Well I reckon it happened, to some extent anyway. The Battle of Troy is one of those stories we all know a little bit about, it seems to be a mixture of Mythology and History. The most beautiful woman in the world, Helen of Troy (or Sparta) – was the daughter of Zeus. Zeus was the Sky and thunder God. So, to believe that is a bit of a stretch. But on the other hand, there is considerable archaeological evidence to indicate Troy was in fact a small town in Western Turkey. A place called Hisarlik, has remains of a fortified town, like Troy. There are even some archaeological ruins of the gates and walls of Troy. Reading a book such as this forced (well, hardly forced) me to look up various places mentioned in this book, you can see pictures, read up about them and imagine what happened around 1180 BCE.

The Song of Troy by Colleen McCullough is a wonderful story that straddles Ancient Mythology and History. McCullough paints a vivid, complex, picture of the period, and all the actors involved in this mysterious period. 

As she did in Masters of Rome, the author recreates the characters and makes them real – she gives them personalities, dramas and lives. I feel like I’ve just returned to the land of the living – this book caused me to ‘go missing’ for the last 4 or 5 days. It’s dense, thorough, slow moving but totally immersive.

The dramas start when Helen leaves her home in Ancient Mycenean Greece to go and live with her Trojan lover Paris. She leaves her husband King Menelaus, brother of King of Kings Agamemnon, to be with Paris – who later turns out to be a bit of a jerk. Menelaus and Agamemnon are mightily miffed by this development and decide to gather up the many Kings of Ancient Greece, create a flotilla of over a 1,000 ships and sail to what is now Western Turkey, to lay siege to the fortified town of Troy.

The King of Troy – Priam, Helen’s now father-in-law had his hands full for a decade as the Greek armies sat on the beaches, slowly strangling the life out of his wealthy city. By the way, Priam had over 50 sons and close to 20 daughters – one wonders how he found time to be king, but he did!

The battle scenes in this story are fantastic. More importantly, the suspenseful build-ups for each battle were so tense I could hardly bear it. There were also some wonderful duels, such as the one between the Achilles and Hector, who were the two most feared warriors of the day. 

Odysseus was perhaps my favourite character. He reminded me a lot of Sherlock Holmes, a bit of a smart-arse (in a good, brainy way), he had an answer for everything and fought with his mind rather than his brawn. Helen was also a favourite, how could someone so beautiful not be? Poor Helen seemed to end up with idiots as lovers though, no wonder she was a bit lost.

Then, there’s The Horse. Enough said.
If you read this, be prepared to leave your family and friends for a few days, slap on your armour, jump in your chariot and be introduced to countless characters whilst cruising the beautiful waters of the Aegean Sea and lazing around the beaches South of the Dardanelles while you prepare for battle. You’ll love it.

I can’t get enough of McCullough’s historical fiction. I must give this one 4.5 stars, rounded down to 4 – only because I prefer the Masters of Rome series and that’s more my thing. Less myth, more history.

4 Stars