Rating: 1/5

Honestly, this is a travesty.

Of course, I understand that The Iliad and its chorus of fascinating characters have inspired hundreds of authors and poets across the centuries and that they have all interpreted in their own way, but this wasn't an interpretation or an homage. This was, for me, a desecration of Homer's epic poem and I can't believe it got published. 

What's more disturbing to me is that this wasn't written by an amateur who didn't know anything about the work or its time period. No clearly, she did her research and read all of the plays and stories that featured the heroes of the Siege of Troy. It's all there, from the beginning to end, every famous event or twist is present in her novel and that was also a major problem with me. I mean, it felt as though she was going to submit her book to the Iliad grand jury or something and had to prove she had the writing chops. It was bogged down with so many details with explanations about the backgrounds of each character and event that It felt contrived to no end. It was as though she wanted to make sure everyone was following and understood everything. It was so heavy handed.

Every character had the same exact voice. I'd sometimes have to check the top of the page to know who was narrating that part. From Diomedes to Helen, same droning, boring and shallow voice. My God, where is the passion, emotions and pathos? These characters inspired the best writers, poets and philosophers in the world! Give them life if you dare to join the ranks of authors who tackled this ancient story! These characters aren't just Joe and Jane going to the market to buy milk!

Then to really maddened me, she completely ursuped the plot, major plotline, to fit her image of Achilles, her Christlike figure. He was so christianized, it was pathetic. He even quotes Jesus on the Cross, I believe at his time of death. In the Iliad, the first lines are about Achilles's anger and the whole story revolves around it. He is enraged because Agamemnon took Brise from him, a woman he'd taken as war loot. It's that trivial. That immature and wrong. But that makes him imperfect and flawed and we come to understand him as Homer reveals things, awful things on Agamemnon. Through it all, Patroclus is at Achilles's side, a loyal and courageous warrior in his own right, but in this book, Patroclus is demeaned and Achilles treats him like shit. So all right, the author at least mentions that they are lovers but it's almost like an afterthought. When Patroclus dies, it's so anti climatic and Brise is such a nasty woman with pettiness and stupidity to spare.

That brings me to the woman in this farce. I can't even. Hecube is like a dog? Andromaque won't say goodbye to Hector? Helen is a nymphomaniac with nice boobs? Kassandra foams at the mouth? 

Jesus. Homer wrote this almost three thousand years ago and he was less sexist!

This was awful. 

That's all folks.