Rating: 5/5

"Intelligence work has one moral law—it is justified by results."

After having just met George Smiley for the first time last month, I admit I was a bit disappointed to hear that he would not be featured prominently in this novel. I should not have worried in the least, however, because Alec Leamas as leading man in this book was every bit as compelling a character as was Smiley. If you are looking for a glamorous spy novel, you should look elsewhere. If you are in search of a smart, realistic look at the business of espionage, then this book and author John le Carré will more than satisfy that desire. This was excellent! I am officially hooked on this series.

"We have to live without sympathy, don’t we? That’s impossible of course. We act it to one another, all this hardness; but we aren’t like that really, I mean . . . one can’t be out in the cold all the time; one has to come in from the cold . . . d’you see what I mean?"

Leamas has just returned to London from Berlin and a bleak, Cold War assignment. He is yearning to come in from the cold and remove that burdensome cloak which is the habiliment of the British intelligence officer. But the powers that be have other plans for him, and Leamas finds himself in what is perhaps his most dangerous and friendless role of all on the other side of the Iron Curtain. He has been assigned the formidable task of dethroning the head of the East German Intelligence agency, one of the most ruthless men imaginable. There are plenty of twists and turns throughout and you really need to keep your eye on the ball at all times to keep up. Leamas is a fascinating character, and I often found myself trying to determine when he was showing us glimpses of his true self and when he was staying in character as a spy.

"Aware of the overwhelming temptations which assail a man permanently isolated in his deceit, Leamas resorted to the course which armed him best; even when he was alone, he compelled himself to live with the personality he had assumed… Only very rarely, as now, going to bed that evening, did he allow himself the dangerous luxury of admitting the great lie he lived."

You’ll find plenty of suspense and just enough action in "The Spy Who Came in from the Cold." There is romance – don’t worry if you don’t have a sweet tooth, it’s far from sugary. There is good and evil and all that murky area in between. And, of course, I can’t fail to mention the brilliant writing once again. Highly recommended for fans of the genre and those that may like to dip into a spy thriller now and again. 

"What do you think spies are: priests, saints, and martyrs? They’re a squalid procession of vain fools, traitors too, yes; pansies, sadists, and drunkards, people who play cowboys and Indians to brighten their rotten lives."