Rating: 5/5

Some familiarity with classical mythology is helpful in reading this book, which is about the Argo's voyage to fetch the Golden Fleece. The voyage itself is a remarkable one on several grounds: it is the first known and charted voyage circumnavigating the known seas and rivers of the time, that is, the Mediterranean, the Adriatic, from the Dardanelles into the Black Sea, through the Danube and over the Tyrrhenian Sea, sailing past Libya, across the desert with the Argo carried on their shoulders by its sailor-heroes, out from the Atlas mountains, back into the Mediterranean and home again to Iolcos. The journey may have been a historical one, possibly to discover a trade-route bypassing Troy, the queen of the seas. Certainly it has been replicated (with sails, not oars) in the twentieth century. The myths and legends probably have a logical explanation, not least of which was that a voyage that demanded blind courage over all other qualities, to sail under the leadership of an inexperienced youth, without a map or any navigational tool or instrument, except the stars, called for men who could only be semi-divine. A colder global climate and seismic activity in the Mediterranean might have accounted for the Clashing Rocks (icebergs?) or the rock and whirlpool of Scylla and Charybdis. Uncharted seas meant unexpected obstacles, shoals, depths, strange islets and new, often savage, peoples, rocks and currents which were ascribed to the malign influences of witches, giants and gods.

Graves is drawing upon the classical writers of old as he details the history, background and character of each of the Argo's heroes. The original number is stated to be fifty; but some of the crew go missing, die, fall ill, and more and more volunteers, each with his own lore, join the ship. The Argo's crew was just a generation off from the Trojan war. Many of those on board later have sons who did fight at Troy. The most distinguished in terms of the Trojan War is Peleus, the father of Achilles. And the most famous absentee was Theseus, held up in a little matter of discipline in Hades. 

The Argo herself is the greatest heroine of the voyage, and her builder, Argus, falls so much in love with her that he is himself one of the fifty aboard the vessel. Hercules is naturally the focal point of the story, and from the moment he is carried into it, he takes over the natural leadership. He is, however, one “whom all men admire and none envy.” In his drunken moments – and there are many of those – he is almost literally a blind brute who some time ago killed his children and his wife, the nightmare memory of which drives him mad. Only drink will calm him then, and when he is drunk, he is not responsible for his actions. Jason, the nominal hero, is always shown up by mythology and by Graves as alternately boastful, autocratic and a scoundrel. Surrounded by men of far greater prowess than Jason, Graves carefully keeps him in the background.

But Jason's story is also that of one civilisation replacing an older, exhausted one. The cult of the Goddess had reached the point when there was an annual ritual of sacrifice of young men, and a ritual feast, sometimes cannibalistic in nature, when these young men, often honoured as King-for-a-Year, were slaughtered. Only, instead of being a symbolic one, a very real slaughter and feast took place, one forbidden to all males. Originally a Middle Eastern or Asiatic custom, it gradually found its way into Europe, where more vigorous men fought to establish a male dominated system of worship and eventually prevailed, but only after a fierce struggle, the history of which emerges in the Jason story in conflict after conflict with kindly but powerful male deities and crafty, cruel though still powerful goddesses or their priestesses. Here the scholarship of Robert Graves and his White Goddess finds full play, and his appendix listing sources and variants of the legend is useful.

If you don't have the time and interest to spend in the nets of classical mythology, this book might be a slog. For me, it was an absolute mine of gold and diamonds, as I looked up impossible names, forgotten to modern Greeks, but which Graves researched so diligently, and wrote about so eloquently, combining the classic Graves humour with the classic Graves poetry. I didn't always find what I was looking for, or what Graves mentions: but I always found much more.

Incidentally, the original title of the book was the rather plebeian “The Golden Fleece” (1944), later released as “Hercules, My Shipmate” (1945).