Rating: 4/5

This book represents an overview recap of the saga played out in the Celestine Prophecy, Tenth Insight, The Secret of Shambhala, and The Twelfth Insight : The Hour of Decision, but without the respective stories of the aforementioned books.

	For me it was a nice recap of the process by which social awareness is obtained with the realization of one’s Birth Vision, and then, the overall mission of humanity, which is to reach spiritual awareness in tandem with our physical environment and in conjunction with the Afterlife as well as other dimensions. 

Social awareness is realized via in honesty, facing our own respective control dramas (Interrogator, Poor Me; Intimidator and Aloof): seeing what they are for, exploring (again in honesty) where they come from, and why they exist. Then, the interpersonal task it to observe when we replay or fall back into the control dramas and then, to respectively stop ourselves from replaying the dramas or continuing them. 

	The Birth Vision is realized in one’s contemplation and realization of one’s mission on Earth. Throughout Redfield’s sagas, it is clear that each person is here on Earth to provide a facet of truth that all can benefit from. However and once again, we respectively do not learn this until we take a moment (meditation) and actually come to learn what our own mission is. Our respective Birth Visions provide what our mission is; what is our core interest? What is it that we are most passionate about? What situations in our lives indicated what our respective Birth Vision is? After that assessment, then comes the real test: are we in honestly, willing to commit to that vision? What are we willing to actually do to fulfill that mission? 

	Beyond these two, the bigger task it to integrate with people who can help with one’s mission integrated with their own respective Birth Visions, which can in turn power and create a spiritual evolution, and peaceful, but profound revolution on Earth, which is the overall mission of humanity, and the next potential phase in our evolution. Yes, the book seems fantastic and idealistic. However, a lot of what we now take for granted once upon a time, was once deemed foolish, backward and impossible even one hundred years ago. The point of the book is how much farther can we go if we progressed, this time, with respect for other people, our environment, cultures different from our own and always striving to work for the greater good, i.e., basic human needs met and therefore no need for war nor strife? With this willing commitment, there is no limit as to where humanity could go; we all have to be on the same page and want to evolve past the superficial and what is best/advantageous – only for me, but at your expense … if you really knew what was really going on.

	The re-capped crucial component toward this personal, interpersonal and ultimately global evolution is to honestly look within and willing, in honesty, first fix what is within us respectively to be fixed! Again, one has to look within and want to fix our own respective control dramas before we can evolve inter-personally, and subsequently globally. It’s what many religious sages have outlined to humanity for a long time, beyond the strict controlling dogmas, and it’s time at this moment for us in this present time to finally get it! 

	The crux beyond the personal fix is that people around us have to also want to be on the same page; to see what the looming problems before us are, and be just as willing collectively, to fix them! One person can only do but so much. However, collectively, we CAN do so much more! The central question is do we prevail together, or perish together? Optimism is a key, but it is not the solution. Collective and honest action toward our survival and evolution is!