Rating: 5/5

BWAHAHAHAHAHAHA! OK, the resolution to #3 (and thus #2) was really cool!

This is the second installment of the Dark Tower series and we once again follow a very strange hero. After not being talked to death by Walter at the end of the last book, Roland is trying to find out what the three cards drawn from the Tarot meant. Though why he believes in a Tarot laid out by Walter of all people, I don't really know.
In any case, Roland finds a door, opens it - and finds himself in the body of another person in another world. It's our New York City it the 80s. Actually, I think all three doors opened up to the same reality, just at different points in time (no spoiler, don't worry). The body he co-inhabits is that of a junkie currently delivering one hell of a lot of drugs on an airplane. Imagine a guy like Roland looking out of a plane's window. *lol* Yep, his look at our world was priceless.
After quite the adventure with Italo-American mobsters and taking Eddie (the junkie) to the other world (where the door appeared), he goes back again through a second door and the second prophesized person is - a woman. A black woman from NYC in the 60s. Oh, and she's in a wheelchair and there is another, greater, problem with her.
Eventually, Roland goes through a third door and finds the last person - a murderer and pervert.
So yeah, the choices are ... weird at best. Especially considering that he's trying to creature more/new Gunslingers! But what are you to do when you try to get together a Ka-Tet and destiny throws these into your path?! Right, you work with what you got and boy, did Roland work here - and despite a physical disability too! 

Aside from the coming together of the prophesy, I highly enjoyed Roland's romp through different versions of NYC in our reality. Gun shops, pharmacies, planes and airports, police stations, the towering buildings, food ... nearly everything is disorienting to him and his view on anything (even cabs) is hilarious for the reader.
We also got to see a parallel world different from the one in book #1 and the creatures there were very interesting (I always like exploring new worlds and their faunas and floras). 

Not too much happens here, really, except for the problems that come with Roland entering the bodies of these three people and the people's lives having events that impact Roland and his quest to assemble his new Ka-Tet. Might sound trivial, but I think it was important as it made us see more of who these people were so as to better understand who they'll become. 

Furthermore, while all narrators of King's books have been very good so far, Frank Muller was VERY good with the different accents. His interpretation of the characters was spot-on for me so that made for an additional level of enjoyment.

I also very much enjoyed how King kept me on my toes, kept me guessing right up until the end if all three would survive, if/how they might change, what the Tarot actually said and what it could mean (prophesies have always been fickle beasts at best). Storytelling at its best.

P.S.: Oh! And there was a mention of Dennis and Thomas from my previous book (The Eyes of the Dragon) so as much as it pains me to say, Paul was (sort of) correct and yes, it did make me smile to recognize the names mentioned in the flashback.