Rating: 5/5

My journey of reading all Stephen Kings books in publication order has brought me back to The Dark Tower. 

This has become a comfort read for me, I love this instalment of The Dark Tower. The introduction to Eddie is one of my favourite character introduction ever absolute perfection. Eddie become fundamental in this book and future instalments, but he is such an unlikely main character. 

One thing that stands out for me in this book is Roland learning things about our reality (Eddies reality) it is so well done, funny and it really makes the reader think. 'Tooter fish' is just one of the moments and its brilliant. Lobstrosities are horrific, only SK could make me scared of a big lobster. Although I enjoyed the first book in The Dark Tower this one is where it really kicks into a new gear. 

We get a full insight into the characters in this book, we get to read about their inner thoughts and feelings which I really enjoyed. The character development even in this early instalment is really a masterpiece and I think this inner voice is one of the reasons its so good. As well as character development the relationship formed between Eddie and Roland is beautiful! 

This book has a lot of foreshadowing, I think this makes the book really hard to put down. There is of course some Easter eggs including a mention of the Shinning. Detta/Odetta's characters is astonishing! So well written and incredibly interesting. The pacing in this book is so fast paced - it flows so well. The three characters contrast each other, yet compliment each other so well a perfectly dysfunction team. You can tell this is part of a serious, you can almost feel the oncoming storm. 
	
"Might as well try to drink the ocean with a spoon as argue with a lover."

"Roland could not understand why anyone would want cocaine or any other illegal drug, for that matter, in a world where such a powerful one as sugar was so plentiful and cheap." Roland's thoughts on sugar always packs a punch. 

"Why do you keep looking back there? the guy in charge had asked. From time to time I need an antidote, Eddie said. From what? Your face." 

"Because the difference between seeing and not seeing can be the difference between living and dying."

"Did-a-chick? Dad-a-Chum!"

There isn't a boring moment in this book and there is nothing I would change. This is a re-read and I do know how The Dark Tower ends but this just adds to my enjoyment - really one of my favourite books I have ever read.