Rating: 2/5

Very mixed feelings about this book.

Let's start with a short chapter by chapter summary. The first three chapters provide a short biography of Tolkien, how he wrote "The Hobbit" and LOTR, and the impact they had after becoming popular. The following four chapters summarise the four books plus a short summary of "The Silmarillion". Intended for the readers of this book who haven't read any of the topical books. Then follow two chapters on satirical and alegorical elements, and Tolkien's theory of the fairy story. After that four chapters on fantasy elements through literature history (classical epic, chansons de geste, medieval romance, and 19th century fantasy). The final three chapters deal with analysing Tolkien's basic sources for names and story elements.

The problem of this book is that half of it is unneccessary. The topic is Tolkien and what's behind LOTR. I fail to see why would anyone who hasn't read Tolkien decide to start with this book. Which makes the three summary chapters pointless. 

Then come the four chapters of literature fantasy elements. In and of themselves they are quite interesting and well presented and analysed. Especially the one about 19th century fantasy which introduced me to information and writers I hadn't known and am interested to learn more about. However, as later chapters show, Tolkien's direct influences and sources came primarily from works NOT mentioned in these chapters. That's about 80 pages now that can be omitted or don't have direct relation to the topic of the book.

The final chapters finally give us what was promised. But it's important to note that all the connections for Tolkien's sources are hypothethical. A point the author does not hide. They are also very logical, researched in great detail, and probably true for the most part. But at no point made factual by quoting Tolkien himself or any other research.

Finally there is the problem of the author himself. Its is clear he loves what he is writing about and had done extensive research. But it seems like he writes about some things just for the sake of producing words. Two examples. In the 7 page chapter on allegory he discusses the possible hidden meaning behind Tolkien's books, concluding there is none by citing Tolkien's foreword to LOTR CLEARLY SAYING SO. Second example is spending three pages on deliberating what Gandalf is. Is he a man, elf, god, Valar? Then finally citing "The Silmarillion" clearly saying he is a maiar and describing what a maiar is in two sentences. The worst thing for me was, when summarising the books, he said TWICE that Eowyn was Theoden's daughter.

And finally an oddity about the book itself. Lin Carted died in 1988. Yet the book mentions the LOTR movies and later authors and books that came out after his death, like the work of Tad Williams, Robert Jordan, Steven Erikson, and George R.R. Martin. Without saying who wrote those additions.

All in all, this is not an uninteresting book. Just one that doesn't feel like it gives the reader what it promises in the title. 

EDIT: became aware that the book was published in 1969, when LOTR was fairly new and not well known among the wider public. So the summary makes sense in that context.