Rating: 4/5

The man in black fled across the desert, and the gunslinger followed.
  

And our BR gang followed the gunslinger as he tracked the devil, and when he paused to relax and make camp, he told stories of his latest gunfight, his old world, his childhood training and the tests he went through to become a gunslinger... and we just followed him, you know, like these flamingos!

 

King has masterfully created a unique world that integrates fantasy genre with American old west: A mysterious world that poses layers of questions like: Is it a world decedent from our own world? Or is it a post-apocalyptic western wasteland? Or is it a new world altogether? And moreover, Where did the burgers come from? Do they also serve French fries? What is the tax situation over there? 

Ummm, Sreyas, you are not making any sense. 

I am not making any sense?

Have you read this book?

For example, My man Roland the gunslinger walks into a township straight out of 19th century, steps into a bar with no electricity nor any modern amenities and asks for a..... wait for it..... burger. There are machines that can talk, there are sex deprived oracles and ghosts the haunt basements, and there are dialogues that made me question myself: Am I too sober to read this story? Should I eat a large quantity of sugar before reading this? 

I have to admit that this is a peculiar book. This is very different from the usual King stories and writing styles. The prose are unique (Read: Odd) and the slang is weird at times. I had fun while reading this book, but when I did pause to take a breath, the only thought I had was 
  "What the hell am I reading?!"
. And the moment I resumed reading the story, those thoughts simply faded away.

That, my friend, must be magic!

On the top of that, I am not sure what's more intriguing: The world of gunslinger or gunslinger himself!

When I finished the book, I found that there was no mention of Crimson King, the primary antagonist of the series! That was when I found out that my edition is old! King revised the book in 2003 and added around 35 pages of new content to the story. 

So I borrowed my friend's Kindle and read the 2003 version too. I'm not sure which one is weirder! The revised Roland is less cold-blooded, I think. 

In the end, It all reminded me of the new Mad Max movie for some reason. You know, Apocalyptic wasteland, unreal locations, mad people, weird slang. To be exact, take Clint Eastwood and place him in Mad Max world (Minus the automobiles), then pick some supernatural elements and cook it up in a cauldron full of LSD, You get Gunslinger. 

Overall, I really enjoyed the book. This installment acts as an introduction to characters and their world(s) but preserves most of the answers for later installments.
---------------------------------------

  Afterthought

One of the coolest lines from the book is 

  
    “Go then, there are other worlds than these.”
  

And Y'all remember how critics slammed the new Dark Tower movie adaptation? This was the official critic's consensus published in Rotten Tomatoes website.

Well played, RT, well played.
--------------------------------------------

  Bonus: BR Report

Shout out to Anish, Avinash, and Izzy for a rather turbulent Buddy Read. My fellow gunslingers were united in confusion, but divided by our ratings. 

As you can see, I gave the book Four stars.

Anish AKA Kraken gave Three stars ------&gt; You can read his review here. Dean from supernatural makes a cameo apperence in his review!

Avinash (AKA uh... wait... still working on an AKA for him) gave Two stars -------&gt; You can find his review here. Also, Avinash has abandoned the series after this traumatizing read :p

Izzy AKA Ninja AKA little Dragon AKA Piggyback rider pulled a DNF on us after reading three dozen pages and gave a One star rating. There was a cat involved. It's a long story. :p

As you can see, Gunslinger is a gamble. You might like it, you might hate it, but you will be confused for sure!