Rating: 3/5

This book is by no means a feel-good memoir in almost any sense, as the dominating character---the author's stepmother---is on a par with any evil character conjured in fables or by Disney. Few of the supporting cast are of much redeeming value as well, from the successful but weak father who lets his new wife control and destroy his family, to the siblings who scheme, plot, and connive. One aunt is a shining light of strong will and determination and kindness. The children each react to oppression in different manners, but I was amazed by how they were able to be manipulated even when they saw what was happening. Although one must always take memoirs with a large dose of skepticism, Mah's recollections will put a chill into any reader. But she was sent to college and received a good education (as were most of her siblings), with much of the credit because of her own strong will (though many times I was bothered by her inability to just tell her parents were they could go when she got older. The dad, as terrible as he could be, did seem to have a measure of love for his kids, even if he couldn't show it and bent to the will of his iron-willed evil (but beautiful) wife. I cannot believe that this family would be a template for most Chinese families, even older and wealthy ones. Of course, these type of machinations can happen anywhere, but this account is often heartrending. I wanted to smack some heads, and say, "you don't treat your family this way." I also didn't see much care given to the servants and loyal staff, though it may just have slipped her mind. One of the best lines in the book, though, occurs when one of the sons, in school in Britain, decides he wants to become a professional bridge player and sends a note asking for permission, and his father sends back a telegrams stating only: "Why not become a pimp instead?"

[And, I hope she is not a Frey. It is horrible and unnerving, and sad, that readers of these types of books have been so repeatedly duped. I hope not in this case, and all future ones.]