Rating: 5/5

“The Dark Tower II: The Drawing of the Three” by Stephen King is the second novel in my journey to The Dark Tower. I loved “The Gunslinger” and knew jumping into this one would continue this epic story.

Before I begin my review, I went a specific route to get the best experience for this book series. If you’re interested in the best way to conquer The Dark Tower series, here’s the reading list I finalized after researching this with the help of several longtime Constant Readers, librarians, and many who have agreed this gives you the most memorable reading experience…

The Stand
The Eyes of the Dragon
Insomnia
Hearts in Atlantis
‘Salem’s Lot
The Talisman
Black House
Everything's Eventual (The Little Sisters of Eluria)
The Dark Tower I: The Gunslinger
The Dark Tower II: The Drawing of the Three
The Dark Tower III: The Waste Lands
Charlie the Choo-Choo
The Dark Tower IV: Wizard and Glass
The Dark Tower: The Wind Through the Keyhole
The Dark Tower V: Wolves of the Calla
The Dark Tower VI: Song of Susannah
The Dark Tower VII: The Dark Tower

Here are the trigger warnings I found while reading “The Dark Tower II: The Drawing of the Three”...

- Drugs
- Homophobic slurs
- Racial Slurs

If any of these trigger you, please don’t read this book. Moving along, I loved how, just like in “The Gunslinger,” King explained his thought process for creating The Dark Tower series, what influenced him, and more. It's a great way to hear all this before jumping in, and once I did, I became hooked.

The start of this novel in New York City was so awesome! I’m a native New Yorker, and it felt like I was reading something straight out of the movie “Goodfellas.” I love mafia/mob movies, so this was written brilliantly to convey that. I loved everything about this part of the book and how each door had a different vibe, scene, and unique characters.

Each door has its own story, making it feel like three stories in one. King pushed the envelope with the storytelling here, especially with the continuation of Roland’s story. I love his character the most; everything he endured in “The Dark Tower II: The Drawing of the Three” was insane.

There’s a ton of action and dark fantasy horror in this story, which made my horror heart happy, especially when it came to Jack Mort. Mort is easily one of the creepiest, most insane, and most memorable antagonists I’ve read since the man in black. Talk about a vile villain with scenes of gore and violence that were next level with everything involving him.

Don’t worry, I’d never spoil anything, but I was blown away between that and a plot twist towards the end that explains a lot in the first book of the series. That was fantastic, and again, it leaves me wanting more. This was another breeze reading since I could not put it down. I now see why everyone loves The Dark Tower series since this is a lot to unpack, but it’s been fast-paced reading. I’m excited to read more, especially with how this ended, since my head is swirling with unanswered questions.

I give “The Dark Tower II: The Drawing of the Three” by Stephen King a 5/5 for being one hell of a jam-packed read. It has everything I love in a horror novel, from monsters, action, crazy villains, a great story, and more on my favorite series character, Roland, the gunslinger. 

Now, if you’ll excuse me, I finally saw what a Drawing of the Three looks like, and it’s time to grab an iced coffee for a trip to the Waste Lands.