Rating: 3/5

The book starts out in contemporary America, and is narrated by Pearl – a second generation Chinese emigrant, who is trying to balance her own 21st century American family life with the needs of her Chinese mother and her mother’s friends. From the third chapter on the narrating is taken over by Winnie, Pearl’s mother, and it transforms into being the story of her life – told against the background of her living in Shanghai in the 1930s and 40s, under the Kuomintang, but with the Communists already making their presence felt, and her experiences with the Japanese invasion of Shanghai . On a personal level it is about Winnie’s relationships, with her own mother, with her first husband Wen Fu, with her friends Hulan, Peanut, Min and Grand Auntie Du, and finally, about her relationship with the Chinese-American translator Jimmy Louie. 

The first pillar of the book for me was the suffocating nature of the family life portrayed. It starts in the present day, with a mother/daughter relationship that I found cringingly intrusive. In fact the whole family is way too over bearing, and that isn’t even just blood relatives. It also includes various friends who have been sucked into this gooey familial web. 

The second pillar was the superstition that is rife throughout the whole story. From the eccentricities of Grand Auntie Du’s household alter , to a plethora of omens that drench the lives of these people – inspiring or damning – and always taken seriously. At one stage there is a visit to a fortune teller, but this seems superfluous given that their lives are already heavily dominated by a super-awareness of portents of good and bad fortune.

The third and final pillar of the book for me was the ubiquitous male dominance in Chinese society at this time. This was illustrated in the general culture, in the licence given to Winnie’s first husband, and in the heavy governance of her father, both towards her and her mother. Men ruled and marriage was all. But this pillar had woodworm.... The women in the story were rebelling – through friendship and support for one another, through the changing politics of the time, and through the sheer cussedness and determination of the main female protagonists in the story.

My least favourite character at the beginning of the book was Helen, or Hulen as she was known in China, but as time went on I could not help but be beguiled by the riches that the author brought to her personality. She was stupid and clumsy, touching, wily, endearing, maddening, loyal, naive, preposterous, turncoat and vulnerable... By the end of the book I found her quite irresistible. Such a huge character. It was a pleasure to follow the ups and downs of her friendship with Winnie, and have my initial dislike so overturned. In fact all the women characters in the book had a lot of presence for me.

The book ends with a return to the present day, with Winnie and her daughter Pearl coming to terms with a lot of things in one another’s lives that they had previously kept secret, and we sense a new closeness between them.

For the most part though the book is harsh and quite brutal. Winnie did not have an easy life, not only in personal terms, but also in what she went through whilst being bombed, in fleeing the Japanese army, and in the aftermath of the war. Having said that – there is a happy ending – and the glow from that did much to warm the cockles of my cowardly heart.