Rating: 5/5

5-stars for the 5th-time through. There's got to be significance to that. If ka wills it, so it will be.

Another journey to the Tower hath begun.

Previously:

3/20/21: 5-stars yet again!!! Who's surprised?

Now the question is, do I continue to read the entire series and actually read the final book this time? 

If ka says it is so, it will be.

3/15/21: It's been almost a year. I guess I should pick up The Gunslinger again. Why not!?

I only have 1,100 other books I want to read. 

Picking up for the 4th time! 🖤

6/3/2020: ALL HAIL THE KING!!!

Five mind-blowing stars, again.

In contrast to the rest of the books in this series, The Gunslinger, is like the black and white portion of The Wizard of Oz. 

By the time you enter The Drawing of Three, you're in Technicolor, baby!!

Earlier

Reread number three.

Also, buddy reading with my dear friend, Shannon. It's her first trip to the Tower and I am so excited to join her at the start of her adventure!

Original Review:

Every once in a while, a reread will come along that completely changes your outlook and opinion on a story. 

This was absolutely the case for me and my reread of The Gunslinger.

Originally, I read it in my early 20's, just out of undergraduate school and to be honest:

I didn't get it. 
I didn't like it. 

I didn't like the atmosphere. 
I didn't like the strange dialogue.
I didn't like the ending for one of my favorite characters.

I had read a lot of King books and this was so different for me. Rereading it now, on the cusp of 40:

I loved it. 
I love the atmosphere. 
I love Roland. 
 
I understand where this is going. 

The palaver between Roland and Walter at the end left me in absolute chills. Where once I gave this 3-stars, I now give it a very solid 5. 

I put it down and immediately went to my bookshelf and grabbed The Drawing of Three: The Dark Tower II and started reading it, staying up way past my bedtime in order to do so. 

Now this thought consumes me: 

I need to get to this damn tower!