Rating: 5/5

Sir Agilulf has a huge problem. Everyone knows he's the most ethically irreproachable knight in Emperor Charlemagne's retinue in his effulgently resplendent, gleaming white armour - but he has a BIG problem.

You see, he doesn't even EXIST.

He is ONLY his armour - and his ethereally high ideals as well - and just a mere appearance of sheer inner willpower. 

Other than that, he isn't THERE.

Yikes! 

Yes, you got it - another story with a message. But WHAT a message. 

How can we even begin to understand its symbolic meaning?

That's easy - we just have to look into Calvino's personal headspace the year he wrote it - 1959. 

Let's look back, then, into Calvino's life story to understand why, for him, 1959 was the year all his wandering psychological chickens came home to roost...

Into one DOOZY of a deep depression.

For starters, Sir Agilulf IS Italo Calvino.

Calvino's tightly controlling parents LEACHED HIS IDENTITY outta him as an infant. His home was a tight little island of do's and don'ts (Very much like my own - which is how I know all this).

His high ethical standards were an invention of his parents, as were mine.

His far-left political leanings were also theirs.

His very life depended on their say-so, in fact. See where I'm going?

Calvino didn't really exist. Just like Sir Agilulf.

So in 1959 - a perfect inner storm showed him all that - with painful clarity. It was deadly. His writing went cold. His gloom was like a huge Black Dog. But in the end he persevered!

What exactly caused the Storm?

Two years earlier, in 1957, the iron fist of communism had smashed all Hungarian freedoms. In the same stroke, Calvino’s leftist ideals were obliterated.

And 1959?

Calvino’s control-freak Dad died. And all Calvino’s inner walls (and inner defences) came a-tumblin’ down. Including his gleaming white suit of armour. Vanished.

But why did Calvino then write his BEST fiction after this débâcle? 

How did THAT happen?

Well, because then Calvino was Finally RELEASED FROM HIS PARENTS’ PRISON! He suddenly realized, as Alan Watts called it, The Wisdom of Insecurity. And became Vulnerable as a Child.

And he THEN was given what Zen Buddhists call JORIKI - Inner Strength. He found happiness in progress, as an eternally unfinished work.

And thus, bubbling, effervescent CREATIVITY flooded into his soul.

And, so also, it is no wonder that Sir Agilulf, too, at the genesis of the Freedom that followed his tormented non-existence, finds his soul released into the pure empyrean azure -

As Calvino now felt born anew -

INTO A PERSPECTIVE OF PERFECT PEACE.