Rating: 5/5

I realize this is a polarizing book, even after decades have passed. I'm actually glad I read it well into its "afterlife" or wherever it's floating as a book now. As novels go (focusing on the word novel here) I think it's a triumph of beautiful and sometimes virtuosic prose over plot lines that seem a little arbitrary and sometimes mawkish. "Art lies in concealing art," Ovid wrote, and I hate to admit I found certain aspects of this book too contrived (maybe too many stereotypes of the anti-stereotypical?). But that said, I have to admit I found it very affecting in places. There is so much of the genuine in this book! I think the ending is particularly beautiful and devastating. I consider this a successful work and even with what I consider its flaws, I'm giving it five stars because I sometimes open this book just to enjoy certain sentences again. Douglas Coupland can tool a sentence about as well as Flaubert when he's on. Forgive him his past trendiness and you might actually realize he's a gifted writer, after all. It definitely made me want to read more by this author. Actually, it made me want to read everything by him. I saw Coupland has published a book of contemporary fairy tales, and as that's a particular fascination for me, I eagerly look forward to reading that. Some of the tales along those lines which he included in Generation X, and which could exist apart from the book in a freestanding form, were among the best writing in the book. So it doesn't really surprise me he later went that direction. I think some people bristle at this book because it can sometimes come across as self-congratulatory or smug prose. But I think when readers bristle at that, they're missing the funny bristling the author is actually doing right alongside them at the actions of his characters, whom I think he also considers preposterous, impossible poseurs--and I think that even includes the character who is almost certainly an autobiographical reflection of Coupland himself in this funhouse mirror of yesterday's cool.