Rating: 2/5

My quest for non-violently misogynistic historical fiction continues... to fail! You'd think it was El Dorado or the Holy Grail or something.

I was really excited to read this book. Lady charlatans? Court intrigues? Witch conspiracies? Great historical research? GIMME!

I enjoyed all the research and the rich detail/descriptions of Paris and philosophical kind of thinking that went into this book, but the characters and the general viper's nest feel left me feeling like I need to wash up after every reading hour. Apparently, it's some sort of a rule that a historical heroine is not allowed a single genuine, non-doomed friendship or familiar relationship with another woman. Her painfully cliched beautiful older sister dies of abortion/having zero preservation instinct. But before that, the heroine's arc can't even BEGIN without rape. Because history is basically women casually getting raped until 1960s, when they begin to get raped but talk about it, right? In some countries.

The heroine was likeable right until her werewolf transformation into a lovesick moron twice. She has a bad spine and feels like a monster - does this belief ever get challenged? NO! Does anyone ever tell her she's NOT a monster? ALSO NOPE. She only feels good about herself when a dude is making love to her (in broad terms) and even then has issues about not being like other women. What kind of message is that?

The rest of the cast are Icky Carton Cardboards save for Mustafa the dwarf and Sylvie the Maid Possessed by Astaroth. I would totally read a spin-off about them, except she'd have to get raped for it to happen. The heroine's family are so repulsive that once again, need to wash. The witches, namely, La Voisin, the heroine's mentor turn out to be grotesque caricatures (woodcuts would play them well). They are no better and no worse than the men who hold all the power and can torture and kill them on the slightest suspicion, but somehow, instead of sending a message of hope that yes, women can survive this bullshit, even if at the cost of becoming horrible themselves, the book just shows their downfall. Also, thanks a lot, book.