Rating: 3/5

Mario Puzo is one author who carries an enormous burden of literary expectation on his shoulders on account of the phenomenal success that he attained with The Godfather. The Dark Arena is the author’s debut novel before he attained a cult status with his later novels which predominantly featured the Italian mafia. At the outset, I need to caution any reader who would pick up The Dark Arena expecting the same kind of finesse that one sees in the later works by the author. 

	The setting and the premise of The Dark Arena is promising enough, but Puzo falters in the execution of the narrative. Walter Mosca is a Second World War veteran, an American GI, who has seen the worst of the war. On the culmination of the war, Mosca returns to his family and girlfriend in America with a lot of expectations. Mosca is war-weary and the bitter experiences that he has had while in combat situations has left an indelible scar on his psyche. Mosca finds himself unable to adjust to civilian life in America. He has adjustment issues with his girlfriend, his mother and brother. Eventually, matters come to such a pass that he decides to return to post-war Germany as a civilian defence employee, part of an American team, ostensibly deployed there to aid in the post-war reconstruction of the country.

	Another reason that drives Mosca to return to Germany is his erstwhile German girlfriend, Hella, who happens to be waiting for his return. Mosca stays with Hella in the American billet, at first, against the regulations that are in force. However, Mosca faces a dark and foreboding situation in post-war Germany, with rampant corruption and the exploitation of the vanquished German population by the American occupiers. It is only the love and companionship that he shares with Hella that enables him to face the dire situation in that country.

	Mario Puzo paints a bleak picture of life in post-war Germany. Was the situation in post-war Germany that bad as it is depicted in the novel? There is a yawning schism between the Germans and the Americans and it was but natural that the vanquished were not always treated with dignity. Puzo introduces several other interesting characters, both American and German, and invariably the Germans are portrayed as being helpless and unable to adjust to the discrimination and exploitation that they face at the hands of the Americans.

	One drawback of the novel is that the development of characters isn’t as robust as one would expect from an author of Puzo’s calibre. I found myself repeatedly comparing the book with the author’s magnum opus, The Godfather, even though it is not fair to do so. The beautiful build-up of characters that you find in Puzo's later works is something that is sorely missing in The Dark Arena. The plot and the storyline too isn’t all that engaging. But one does find flashes of brilliance in the narrative, especially when Puzo engages in describing the hardships of the hapless Germans wallowing in the distress of poverty, corruption and all-around exploitation at the hands of their conquerors. 

	I wouldn’t rate The Dark Arena too highly, but at the same time, I feel that it is an important work by the author which amply exhibits flashes of his brilliance and talent which eventually catapulted him to fame and fortune.