Rating: 2/5

I'm wearing my softest, fuzziest slippers while writing this review - treading as lightly as I possibly can - realising that I'm on holy ground here, discussing a much beloved book among many of my very dear and respected Goodreads friends. PLEASE, DON'T HATE ME!

This book was at a disadvantage from the beginning, because the spectres of Babs and Nick haunted me continuously from the horrendous movie adaptation. However, I was fully expecting to love and revel in this big, romantic, Southern family epic. 

I didn't.

There, I said it. I didn't love it, I didn't enjoy it. I am bewildered how I received this book so off the mark from legions of other readers. If you love this book, please just laugh and disregard my review and keep on loving it.

My first problem is that I found it incredibly sentimental, with prose as purple as can be. An example:

He was tall and thin and had a complexion like goat cheese left on the table too long. The funeral parlour smelled like dead flowers and unanswered prayers.

And another:

I tasted the wine and it was so robust and appealing that I could feel my mouth singing with pleasure when I brought the glass from my lips. The aftertaste held like a chord on my tongue; my mouth felt like a field of flowers. The mousse made me happy to be alive.

I also found a very weird, incestuous tone cropped up dozens of times throughout the book. This is a book in which sisters kiss their brothers on the lips, where a brother carries his sister "like a bride", where a mother tells a son if she was younger she'd "have a go" at him, where a father chases "lewdly" after his daughter after she shows him her budding breasts. And so on, and so forth, and I could come up with many more examples. Once I started noticing the weirdness, I just couldn't stop. It gave me "the no feeling".

I found the dialogue to be horrid - characters constantly used each other's names in almost every line of dialogue. "Are you enjoying this Tom?" "Lowenstein, I really am not." "Oh, Tom, Tom, but why not?" "I wish I knew, Lowenstein." "TOM!" "Lowenstein!!!!" Once I noticed it, it was impossible not to notice it, and cringe. I felt like I was watching a terrible 1980s movie most of the time, with a showy, cinematic predictability. 

And, believability went out the window with the TIGER. For goodness' sakes!!! A very poor shrimping boat family has a Bengal tiger in their barn?

Finally, the love story between Tom and Lowenstein did nothing for me. She wasn't particularly likeable (and so unprofessional, I might add!). So much build up leading to their relationship and then the sex scene was chaste enough to fit in a Stephenie Meyer book. BOO. And the way it ended was over the top, cheesy. 

Now that I've complained mercilessly (and I apologise for that), I will say one thing Pat Conroy does consistently well, and which I appreciated, is convey his love for the American South: its beauty, its vibrancy, its imperfections and uniqueness. The South, in particular Colleton, South Carolina, is the main character and anchor to the rest of the players in the story. The sense of place and its tidal pull on the Wingo family is indelible and irresistible. That is where the gold lies.