Rating: 5/5

Interviewer: What was your opinion of The Kiss of the Spider Woman by the Argentinian Manuel Puig?
Reviewer: It is hard to put into words how much I loved this novel. It was fantastic, so unique and satisfying overall. Heartbreaking, but I was feeling content when I finished. 

Interviewer: What made this book so special, can you tell us more? 
Reviewer: Glad you asked. The structure was something I haven’t read in a while. You see, the novel is written almost entirely as a dialogue. Sometimes, eve as transcripts of conversations. We also have letters, internal monologues, length extracts from books and articles on homosexuality. Everything goes so well together, making this novel complete. It is of no surprise that there is a movie and a musical made after this novel. Puig was also a screenwriter, so it explains why the book is quite cinematic. Wikipedia calls his work as pop art, I suppose it fits. 

Interviewer: Interesting, now tell us what this book is about. 
Reviewer: Two very different men share a prison cell. One is a movie afficionado and a homosexual, the other is a Marxist revolutionary. Their relation is tense at first, as both distrust each other. However, Molina, the Sheherazade of the cinema, begins to share stories of his favourite movies each night. A friendship begins to form, they exchange their life stories and more, but things are not entirely as they seem. 

Interviewer: What is the thing with the title? 
Reviewer: Ahh, you will have to read the book to find out. Who is the spider and who is the fly…and is there a kiss? 

Interviewer: What do you think about the translation?
Reviewer: Well, I read it in Romanian translated by Ilinca Ilian. I can only comment on that translation, which is well done. I also listened to parts of the novel in the original Spanish and I thought that the voice of the author was well preserved in translation

Interviewer: Any closing remarks?
Reviewer: Yes, if you are bored of reading the same literary fiction over and over again, this is going to be like a gust of fresh air. Give it a try. 

This was fun. 

I also want to mention that I am more and more in love with Argentinian literature. Borges is the exception, though.