Rating: 5/5

***The quest for the DARK TOWER continues***

  

Beginning mere hours after the events of the The Gunslinger, Roland Deschain wakes from his bizarre encounter with the Men in Black Man in Black to find himself on a strange beach. Before he can even get his bearings, he's attacked by 
  Killer Crabs
 the Seafood from Hell in the form of ginormous, ill-tempered (though wonderfully delicious) “lobstrosities.” After a near fatal encounter with the vicious entrees, Roland finds himself seriously injured and feverish from infection. Slowly and painfully Roland begins to make his way across the beach as his health rapidly deteriorates. 

While trekking across the massive beach, Roland separately encounters 3 strange doors. Each door is inscribed with a different name matching tarot cards the appeared during Roland's earlier encounter with the Man in Black. The doors appear to be standing in the middle of nowhere with nothing behind them. In fact, they are each a passageway to a New York City very similar to our own. 

Roland’s investigation of these doors (each leading to a different year), his introduction to 2 of the 3 members of the group that will journey with him throughout the rest of the series (i.e. his “Ka-tet”) and the events leading up to their joining Roland's gang comprise the balance of this book. I'll stop there as I think that's enough of a plot summary to give a good sense of the book...with one exception. That one exception is that I would be remiss if I did not mention that the shootout between Roland and Eddie on one side and [withheld to avoid spoiler] at [withheld to avoid spoiler] is among the best choreographed gunfights I can remember. 

It's sweet, sassy and super and makes the book worth reading all by itself. 

THOUGHTS:

I just want to make a few commnets on the importance of this book. As a whole, the Dark Tower is one of the most uniquely enjoyable and imaginative fantasy series I have ever read...probably the most. It's this book in which King’s truly epic vision of the rest of the series begins to form and take shape. I enjoyed the first book but it's easily my least favorite of the series and the one most disconnected from the rest of the tale. The sense of vastness was there only in hints and while I think King did an admirable job revisting "The Gunslinger" to correct some of the glaring inconsistencies between it and the later novels, it is still not up to the rest of the series. 

With this story the multiverse begins to open up and the creeping hugeness of the plot begins to bloom. This story is actually my second least favorite of the entire series, but I would still need a slide rule and an abacus to calculate this book’s TOTAL NUMBER OF FUNTASTIC UNITS. It's just that the next installments are so saturated with magical awesome that they can't even be measured by existing technology and can actually cause bouts of hot flashes and tingling in the naughty bits. 

Yes, they are that good. 

However, it's with this book that the long, wonderful, magical, incredibly fun and wholly original journey of Roland and his Ka-tet is really born. I can not recommend this book or the series more highly and it gets my HIGHEST POSSIBLE RECOMMENDATION!!!

5.0 stars. 

P.S. As I mentioned in my review of the previous book, I have listened to all 7 of the Dark Tower installment on audio (the first 4 read by the late Frank Muller and the last 3 read by George Guidall). I believe that anyone who has read the books and not listened to these stories on audio is REALLY MISSING SOMETHING WONDERFUL. I think the quality of the reading truly enhances the enjoyment of the story.