Rating: 5/5

”Pride has often been his best friend”

Perfection in a book!!! One of the best stories and most wonderfully written books of all time. My favourite Jane Austen book because of this magnificent character sketch of pride and prejudice, it’s weighty themes and witty dialogue.

Lively, spirited, humorous, and romantic. A carefully orchestrated story of love and deception, manners and impropriety, and of course pride and prejudice, all of which secures this book’s place in the Hall of Fame for classic literature and its continued popularity among many.

Simply put a masterpiece. A comedy of manners and marriage!!!.

The Plot

With the opening line "Any man in possession of a large fortune must be in want of a wife”, there is no doubt of Jane Austen’s intent. This is matchmakers’ paradise where wealth, class, marriage, courtship, social standing and the arrogance of the elite are pitched against those who wish to marry into fortune. Except not all young ladies believe wealth is more important than love. 

The storyline is simple. New arrival Charles Bingley, a rich bachelor from the North of England, rents the Netherfield estate close to the family home of Mr &amp; Mrs Bennett. Keen to have her daughters married to wealthy husbands, Mrs Bennett asks her husband to pay a visit that secures an invitation to the Netherfield ball where the eldest daughter Jane, captures the attention of Charles Bingley. 

The same cannot be said of Eliza Bennett who elicits one of the most condemning remarks, in the book, from Bingley's friend, the aristocrat Mr Darcy, who does not see her as his equal. At this stage of the book Darcy is described as “haughty, reserved, and fastidious, and his manners, though well bred, were not inviting”. Of himself, he declares…

“The more I see of the world, the more am I dissatisfied with it; and everyday confirms my belief of the inconsistencies of all human characters, and of the little dependence that can be placed on the appearance of merit or sense.”

Not exactly wrong of the time and characters but this sets the tone and backdrop for more heated exchanges and clashes between wealth and principle. As the exchanges between the two couples intensifies, their respective relationships are tested by the arrival of other possible suitors and a chain of events that sees the Bennett’s good name all but destroyed, until Mr Darcy intervenes. Not out of goodness but as he declares to Lizzy, he only thought of her.

Coming out of nowhere, Darcy makes a marriage proposal to Elizabeth which almost seemed like a sport if it were not for the harsh exchange between the two main characters, and is so iconic I can’t remember how long ago I first encountered this memorable exchange. 

“You are mistaken, Mr. Darcy, if you suppose that the mode of your declaration affected me in any other way, than as it spared the concern which I might have felt in refusing you, had you behaved in a more gentlemanlike manner." 

Alas, the story does not end there, and all comes good in the end.

Review and Comments 

The themes of marriage, wealth, class, education, male inheritance, and social expectations are no surprise for books written in this period. However, what was so refreshing and captivating about this book is the balance of good versus evil, the steadfast principles held by some in contrast to the immoral behaviours of others. We are treated with a range of fabulous characters and the standout from the book – well it’s the humour!!! with scenes like Mr Collins' absurd, awkward, and fumbling proposal to Elizabeth. 

However, one of my favourite book lines, was Mr Bennett’s riposte to his hypochondriac wife, 

“I have the highest respect for your nerves, they are my old friends.” 

A delightful, charming, easy to read classic with some explosive scenes and despicable characters that encapsulated so many themes. However, it is the two main characters that personfiied the predominant theme of the book - Pride and Prejudice. 

The unquestionable 'pride' of Darcy who initially failed to appreciate Elizabeth for the intelligent and high-spirited person she was and for failing to contemplate a rejection or her feelings with his insensitive and misjudged marriage proposal. It is almost comical that Darcy goes to length to point out Eliza's inferiority during his offer of marriage, and reminds her that his love for her is "against his will, against his reason, and even against his character". Wow!!!
 
Not without faults, it was Lizzy who then embodied 'prejudice' for misjudging Darcy's and being blinded to his other virtues and goodness because of his class. Yet you can only adore Elizabeth for her freedom of thought, feminism and her ability to pervade her class and offer well voice’s opinions amidst so much snobbery and spite. 

The way in which the subplots, characters, themes and humour are so intricately woven into this wonderful story is what makes Pride and Prejudice one of my all time favourite books. A true masterpiece that had never aged, in my opinion.

Other favourite quotes

“Vanity and pride are different things, though the words are often used synonymously. A person may be proud without being vain. Pride relates more to our opinion of ourselves, vanity to what we would have others think of us.”

“Laugh as much as you choose, but you will not laugh me out of my opinion.” 

“From the very beginning— from the first moment, I may almost say— of my acquaintance with you, your manners, impressing me with the fullest belief of your arrogance, your conceit, and your selfish disdain of the feelings of others, were such as to form the groundwork of disapprobation on which succeeding events have built so immovable a dislike; and I had not known you a month before I felt that you were the last man in the world whom I could ever be prevailed on to marry. Ouch!!!

If you haven’t watched the mini series or read the book I would encourage you to do both. It is no accident I chose to read ‘Pride and Prejudice’ as my first book of 2024 and to complete the experience I indulged in the BBC’s TV adaptation of the book for the 20+ time. Having watched different adaptations of the book, for me personally there is and can only be one Mr Darcy and it’s Colin Firth. In fact the whole cast is superb so I highly recommend this mini series over any others. I promise you will get an equally enjoyable but different experience with the book and this mini series.