Rating: 4/5

OK, here’s my confession: Many years ago, I used to smoke. I guess I started smoking during my youth just because my parents hated it. Later I smoked even though my partner hated it. At certain periods I admitted I was smoking, at other periods I said I didn’t. A few times I stopped smoking for a few years and then started again. Did I have to quit smoking because others didn’t like it? At the end I just stopped smoking when I wanted to, without announcing it. 

Zeno Cosini’s confessions are quite different. Zeno, a middle-aged grumpy Italian businessman, became obsessed by his unsuccessful attempts to quit smoking. His immense frustration led him to find a doctor to help him even though he tells the doctor: 'I suppose you don't believe I need a cure and can't understand why I take it so seriously.' p.27The doctor asked Zeno at a certain point of time to write down his memories. This gave him the chance to think and write freely about his parents, his family, his marriage, his mistress, friends, business etc. The reader may often think: What does all this has to do with smoking?

Not long ago I discussed here with one of my dear GR friends the complexity of reading a book about a protagonist one doesn’t like. I must confess I thought Zeno wasn’t a nice person either. It took me quite a few hundreds of pages to understand that I like him nevertheless, exactly because of his honesty about his shady, unpleasant, sometimes even nasty, sides, while I wanted to assume he was indeed honest. 

One should bear in mind that Zeno wasn’t so open about himself towards everybody. He wrote his confessions for his psychoanalyst as part of his therapy. At the end something happened which led Zeno’s psychoanalyst to publish these confessions, but obviously you’ll have to read this book to discover what it was… 

Moritz von Schwind / ‘Der Traum des Gefangenen’, 1836, via Wikimedia Commons 

After more than 500 pages of openhearted confessions I was full of joy when I reached the last part of the novel which explained everything in the context of Zeno’s psychoanalysis. The pieces of the puzzle fell into the right place. This novel is fascinating not only because of what Zeno tells us about his life, but because of the subtle interaction between psychoanalyst and patient: At the end all themes of life repeat themselves between them. Zeno wrote: 'If only he knew how we tend to talk about things for which we have the words all ready, and how we avoid subjects that would oblige us to look up words in the dictionary!' p.536Zeno explained what happens during psychoanalysis and thus during this novel: '… neither the same images nor the same words ever repeat themselves. It ought to be called by another name, psychical adventure, perhaps. Yes, that is just what it is. When one starts such an analysis, it is like entering a wood, not knowing whether one is going to meet a brigand or a friend. Nor is one quite sure which it has been, after the adventure is over.' p.551Except for the fact we all know by now that smoking is unhealthy, only very little has changed since Svevo has published this book in 1923. Zeno’s stream of consciousness could have been written just now. In his own way Zeno struggled with the same themes as you do. This may be the reason you might tend to forget how extremely modern this book was and is: Psychoanalysis was new at that time, just like the use of a stream of consciousness as a literary technique. No wonder that James Joyce, Svevo’s friend, appreciated this book. Zeno’s confessions are those of Svevo, partly fictionalized, just like Karl Ove Knausgård ‘My Struggle’ novels which were written almost a century later. 

Just like Svevo I could have written a lot more about this book, but: 'I must put a stop to all this folly, unless I want to end in a lunatic asylum.' p.554Read it!