Rating: 2/5

Without thought, with the simple resolve that had made him the last of them all, the last to continue marching on and on long after Cuthbert and the others had died or given up, committed suicide or treachery or simply recanted the whole idea of the Tower; with the single-minded and incurious resolve that had driven him across the desert and all the years before the desert in the wake of the man in black, the gunslinger stepped through the doorway.

The journey to the Dark Tower continues, and the gunslinger marches on. But the wonderful desert setting is gone, and so is the eerily mysterious man in black.

The Drawing of the Three feels like a spin-off. You realise while reading that the book has a purpose that fits into the overarching story of the series, but it feels like taking a break from the actually interesting part. Roland winds up on a beach in the middle of nowhere, and has to step through a doorway leading into the unknown, to find and recruit three rather unwilling companions for his journey.

I’ve read several reviews and opinions saying that The Gunslinger is a weak start to the series, and that this book takes it up to another level. And I couldn’t disagree more. I thought the first book was way better. Everything about it was much more interesting than this space-filler second volume.

The only thing that actually is better in my eyes, is the writing. Stephen King visibly improved between these two instalments, and some of his passages are a joy to read.

From the dead serious...

The sun was down. Darkness had come.

To the hilarious...

This screaming, writhing thing could not have just undergone inpromptu surgery by subway train half an hour ago.

In the end, this book was not particularly good. It added nothing, and it didn’t make me feel anything. I can't for the life of me understand why anyone would consider this outrageously boring side quest better than the adventures of Roland in the ruins of Midworld, but that's individual opinion for you. I am, however, looking very much forward to reading the next book in the series.

Onward to the Tower!

"We are going to go, Eddie. We are going to fight. We are going to be hurt. And in the end we will stand."

Dark Tower reviews:
#1 
  The Gunslinger

#2 
  The Drawing of the Three

#3 
  The Waste Lands

#4 
  Wizard and Glass

#5 
  Wolves of the Calla

#6 
  Song of Susannah

#7 
  The Dark Tower