Rating: 4/5

Last night, I had to ease myself down from an OCD treadmill, after a day spent fending off incessant reminders from the authorities that the world was no longer a safe or a healthy place, and we all had to do our best straight-‘n-narrow bit to stay ahead of the game. 

Sound familiar?

Like you, I was trying to stay normal.

So, after the dishes were safely tucked away into their cradles in the dishwasher, and that cantankerously noisy household device had been duly started, drowning out the news, I rigidly sat back in a kitchen chair - to find out where exactly in this self-isolated day, I had gone wrong...

And I was once more catapulted back to the nineties, a tumultuous time of leaner, smarter and better Gen-Xers in an endless, blindingly fast lane. 

That was where it started. The Me-Gen’ers were now calling the shots. And Enoch's Giants, in their latest manifestation as the Me-Geners, were morphing into powerful DROIDS.

I remembered how Douglas Coupland, when I bought the first hardcover edition of this book back in ‘94, had reminded me that we were all suddenly behaving as if the very life, and our very identity, had been sucked outta our arteries!

And that’s still us, or more so now, at the beginning of the 20´s - the start of the Age of the Quaranteens (AKA burnt out, viral Gen-Xers)!

Coupland is right. Our personalities have now been leeched away. But here on Goodreads - have you noticed? - there are quite a lotta reviewers and bloggers who are attempting to INJECT THAT LIFEBLOOD BACK INTO OUR SYSTEMS.

Books are where we start. 

Books are where we begin our re-invention of our lives.

Coupland said our brains trust reconditioning resulted in a situation back in the 1990’s where we found we had lost our stories to tell. 

Well, here - right here on GR - that’s all changing. We’re reading and ordering vast MOUNTAINS of books. ALL chock fulla great stories that are REMAKING OUR LIVES - into Real Things. And things of Beauty.

Coupland may have thought we were all becoming robots. 

We’re not, now.

We’ve got our literacy.

AND we are RE-IMAGINING Helen Reddy’s power anthem of the eighties:

WE ARE READERS -
HEAR US ROAR!

Watch out, you Forces of Impersonality!

Cause WE have our books.