Rating: 3/5

A group of boys are stranded on a remote and deserted island. How will these boys fare away from grownups, away from society, away from rules? 

Written in 1954, The Lord of the Flies, written by William Golding is considered a classic. The symbolism in this book is unreal especially if you consider the colors mentioned in the book (pink was mentioned 40 times). Like most people, I read this in high school, and I got a lot more out of it as an adult. At the very end, I now ponder if that actually happened or if Ralph was just imagining it (trying to avoid any spoilers here). The author who is deceased now has stated that the book can mean whatever you want it to mean so clearly everything in this review is absolutely true. If you want to check out more of my thoughts and questions raised for this book, please check out the Readalong. Thank you to everyone who participated and made this reading so much better than my first!

Although this book goes down as a classic, it is rather bleak—there is very little hope or anything that can be considered uplifting. There were too many boring descriptions of the scar (more than 20+ times) and sand (more than 70+ times). As for the audiobook through Audible, William Golding, the author, is reading the book. He sounds extremely bored. I do not recommend the Audible version. 

Overall, I wish that I hadn’t read this as a child. It traumatized me, and I wasn’t ready for it. There is too much violence and ill will in this. Every time I would pick up a book, I would think about Piggy and feel darkness. However, as an adult, perhaps I was more prepared knowing the ending, but I also developed the sophistication to appreciation the subtleties of this book. 

This book is listed as one of the 100 Books to Read According to the BBC:
https://www.listchallenges.com/bbcs-t...

2025 Reading Schedule
Jan	A Town Like Alice
Feb	Birdsong
Mar	Captain Corelli's Mandolin - Louis De Berniere
Apr	War and Peace
May	The Woman in White
Jun	Atonement
Jul	The Shadow of the Wind
Aug	Jude the Obscure
Sep	Ulysses
Oct	Vanity Fair
Nov	A Fine Balance
Dec	Germinal

Connect With Me!
Blog Twitter BookTube Insta My Bookstore at Pango