Rating: 5/5

To summarize: Mistah. Darcy. 

*cue the long, sustained high-pitched squealing *

This was truly as glorious as I remember. Every time I reread this novel, I love it more. 

 

The 
  romance
, the 
  high society
, the 
  witty banter.
 Gah. I just adore it all. 

"And your defect is to hate everybody."
"And yours," he replied with a smile, "is willfully to misunderstand them."

 Elizabeth Bennet  (second eldest of the five Bennet sisters) is the one with a  clear, level head.  Jane is the beautiful one, Mary is the look-at-me-I'm-so-pious one, Lydia is the I'm-so-dumb-that-I'm-probably-going-to-get-murdered one and Kitty is the well-she's-just-kinda-there one. 

Now, back in the day...there was one, singular goal for all women above the age of 16. GET YOURSELF A MAN  before you reach 25 and become a 
  SPINSTER
 *cue high-society ladies fainting*. 

Mrs. Bennet (their mother) has taken this so completely to heart that she thinks of nothing else. After all, 

"It is a truth universally acknowledged, that a single man in possession of a good fortune, must be in want of a wife."

 Mr. Bingley and Mr. Darcy moved into town and immediately Mrs. Bennett set her dasterdly plans in motion (on behalf of her mortified children). She will do whatever necessary to get a rich man to put a ring on it (oh Beyonce, your words are applicable in any century).

"A lady's imagination is very rapid; it jumps from admiration to love, from love to matrimony in a moment."

 Only, there is a snag in her otherwise flawless plans. Elizabeth is not going to roll over to whatever man is thrust her way. To her mother's ever-living-disappointment, Elizabeth has all the spunk and backbone of a truly glorious woman: 

"I could easily forgive his pride, if he had not mortified mine."

 Truly a great read, no matter the century.

Plus Jane Austen is totally my soul sister.

"I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading! How much sooner one tires of any thing than of a book! -- When I have a house of my own, I shall be miserable if I have not an excellent library."

Audiobook Comments
As with most old-timey books, It is far easier for me to listen to them than to read them. I like hearing the odd phrases and ancient unused words much more than struggling through the hard copy. I really enjoyed this audiobook and the narrator did a fab job of characterization.

The 2018 ABC Challenge - P

YouTube | Blog | Instagram | Twitter | Snapchat @miranda.reads 

Happy Reading!