Rating: 5/5

I’ve read the Dark Tower Series several times over the years. It is a series I hold very close to my heart, one that draws me in and whispers in my ear; begs to be read again. 

So, when  Calamity Bev,  Rootin’ Tootin’ Pistol Packin’ Delee,  Jumpin’ Jeff and Straight Shootin' Susan asked me to join them along the Path of the Beam on a most noble quest to the Dark Tower I said yes without a moment’s hesitation. 

 The Drawing of the Three is a book that on its own is in my list of top 10 books ever written. This is one of those books that left my brains splattered on the wall behind me. I was completely blown away by this book. It is nearly impossible to put down. The writing is impeccable, it’s very fast paced and the storyline is captivating. 

Roland wakes up on a beach-a beach from hell, but a beach nonetheless. 

He must draw three people into his world to accompany him on his quest. Along this beach he finds 3 doors. 

Behind the first door, marked “The Prisoner”, he meets my literary soulmate, Eddie Dean. Eddie has a monkey on his back and that monkey’s name is Heroine. 

Door number two is marked, the Lady of Shadows and it is from that door that Roland draws Odetta Holmes/Detta Walker. She has lost her legs in a horrifying accident but that is only the tip of the iceberg as the old saying goes.

As Roland, Detta and Eddie travel up the beach in search of Door Number 3 they encounter a few obstacles. And as Eddie points out so politely to Detta, “Well,what was behind Door Number One wasn’t so hot, and what was behind Door Number Two was even worse, so now, instead of quitting like sane people, we’re going to go right on ahead and check out Door Number Three. The way things have been going, I think it’s likely to be something like Godzilla or Ghidra the Three-Headed Monster, but I’m an optimist. I’m still hoping for the stainless steel cookware."

So what does Door Number 3 bring?

The Pusher . Jack Mort. The Man in Black foretold who would be behind these doors and when he got to the third door he told Roland “Death. But not for you, Gunslinger.” Jack Mort. The pusher of objects. Will he be drawn into this world as Eddie and Odetta/Detta were?

Will Roland get his Keflex in time?

Will the lobstrosities ever satisfy their hunger?

All these questions will be answered. 

The Drawing of the Three will not disappoint you. I personally guarantee your satisfaction.

Ps. If you click the names of posse you'll get to read their most excellent reviews!