Rating: 5/5

This is an amazing book. Well, I should say that this is an amazing story of survival because it is an autobiography (an oral autobiography then written down by the authors). 
it tells the story of Phoolan Devi, an indian girl born into the lowest caste (other than the untouchables), poor of course, in a village of India. As a girl she had no rights and no protection other than what her father could give. She was married off at age 11 to a middle-aged man who raped and tortured her. She escaped that situation to be beaten, raped and shamed by her fellow villagers and the upper caste members who controlled her village.
She was kidnapped by a band of bandits and saved only because the leader of the bandits fell in love with her. That part may sound romantic but it was anything but. She still was not allowed to return to her family. She still had to live the life of a bandit. She was branded a criminal. Her bandit husband was murdered by another bandit who then kidnapped her and took her from village to village, bound and naked, saying to the men of the villages, "Use her as you like." And they did, publicly, brutally, continuously. 
She survived all this, escaped, became the leader of her own band of bandits and finally surrendered herself to the Indian authorities.
She spend 11 years in Indian prison, was finally released and was voted into the Indian Parliament. Several years later she was assassinated on the steps of her house.
She has become a myth and a legend to millions of lower caste people, women in particular, for fighting for their rights, for trying to bring justice to the poor people who have no justice.
This book tells her story in her words. It is told in simple sentences, with great detail and is filled with personal emotions. It also gives the reader a very involved understanding of how the lives of millions of people in India work from day to day. The most gripping aspect of this story is that, except for her ability to rise above her place in her world, it is not an exceptional tale. It is the story of millions of people, no more singular and no more spectacular in the poverty, the lack of justice, the powerlessness of these people.