Rating: 5/5

The narrator of a tale is a young nun who was told to write the story as a penance.
The king is due to meet his paladins… And every knight must show his face to the king…
“I’m talking to you, paladin!” insisted Charlemagne. “Why don’t you show your face to your king?”
A voice came clearly through the gorge piece. “Sire, because I do not exist!”
“This is too much!” exclaimed the emperor. “We’ve even got a knight who doesn’t exist! Let’s just have a look now.”
Agilulf seemed to hesitate a moment, then raised his visor with a slow but firm hand. The helmet was empty. No one was inside the white armor with its iridescent crest.
Kings mustn’t be surprised by anything… So the king isn’t surprised…
Now the army is on the march… The battle commences… It is furious and grotesque…
The whole Imperial army coughed and shook in its armor, quivering and shaking as it raced towards the Infidel dust, hearing more coughing getting nearer and nearer. The two dusts fused, and the whole plain rang with the echo of coughs and the clang of lances.
For a young inexperienced warrior it is his first combat… He fights… And unpredictably he falls in love with a brave amazon – foxy Bradamante, heroine borrowed from Orlando… He happily reports to the Nonexistent Knight…
“Knight,” says he, panting, “at last I’ve found you! Now I want to be a paladin too! During yesterday’s battle I had my revenge… in the mêlée… then I was all alone against two… an ambush… then… now I know what fighting is, in fact. And I want to be given the riskiest place in battle… or to set off on some adventure that will gain glory… for our holy faith… to save women and sick and weak and old… you can tell me…”
However an object of the greenhorn’s infatuation is in love with the phantasmal paladin… Suddenly a great secret is revealed so the Nonexistent Knight has to embark on a very special quest… The amazon and the greenhorn follow… Paladin is in a hurry to save a noble dame in danger…
“You come too late, noble knight,” said an old man. “These valleys still resound with the cries of those poor women. A short while ago a fleet of Moorish pirates landed on this coast and sacked the convent, bore off the nuns as slaves and set fire to the walls.”
Knights errant always save damsels in distress never asking them if they wish to be saved or not.