On the face of it this the classic account of traveller Marco Polo's journey from Venice to China and back again is pretty straight forward. Man makes journey, writes book, has mint named after him.

Yet it is still controversial over what it alleges, contains and does not contain. The book has a complex and unclear textual history. That names of persons, places and offices are in a Persian form is remarkable given the claim that the Polos were active at the court of the Mongol Khan in China  rather than the Mongol Ilkhan in Prsia. The involvement of noted writer of courtly Romances Rustichello of Pisa, the two apparently spent some time together in prison, is grounds for suspicion -it has been suggested that possibly he was the author or compiler of the work. Though in which case one might wonder why the Travels aren't more literary and courtly in flavour. Some early commentators were disturbed that Polo doesn't mention what we now call 'The Great Wall of China', but since it wasn't built until the seventeenth century after the Mongols had been persuaded to mount up and seek out pastures new that seems a reasonable omission, others were sceptical of the Polo's claim to have worked in government service in China. But it seems there are enough examples in the Mongol world of employing, not necessarily Italians, but non-locals as administrators , judges and officials, for this to be plausible and not just the idle boast of someone who knows their story can never be fact checked. Another theory is that the book in fact was intended to be a kind of pre-Baedeker gazetteer to travel and trade in Asia for go getting ambitious European business men - I feel one would have to effectively reconstruct the text to get practical use out of it, like the number of days between towns, types of goods available in different entrepôts, ideal times of year to travel, deserts to avoid, that kind of thing - the information is there but not immediately accessible. Having said that, other medieval manuals  thinking for example of The Goodwife of Paris  are not user friendly either by contemporary standards.

We are left with the facts that the thing plainly exists, and that it is what it is. The problem perhaps is us and what we expect and look for.

It also contains a mildly garbled account of the rise to power of Genghis Khan and his Mongols.

 I'd be inclined to give this a Ted score of two, unless it was an illustrated edition, in which case three