Rating: 4/5

Imagine this: You are the world’s last gunslinger, on the most obsessive quest one can ever think of, injured and half-dead from blood poisoning — and you see a free-standing door on a deserted lobstrosity-infested beach that seems destined to be your final resting place. The door that seems to lead to nowhere, hinged on empty space. What do you do?

Yeah, I thought so. Of course you go through. 

 ‘Well,’ Eddie said, ‘what was behind Door Number One wasn’t so hot, and what was behind Door Number Two was even worse, so now, instead of quitting like sane people, we’re going to go right on ahead and check out Door Number Three. The way things have been going, I think it’s likely to be something like Godzilla or Ghidra the Three-Headed Monster, but I’m an optimist. I’m still hoping for the stainless steel cookware.”

 
—————

As much as I got a kick out of bleak and feverishly surreal postapocalyptic world of The Gunslinger, what King does in this book was way more fun. He takes the last gunslinger, the “Tower junkie” Roland of Gilead and throws him into our world, and the collision of Roland and the 20th century works quite lovely.

  “Here is another one ready to die for you, Roland. What great wrong did you ever do that you should inspire such terrible loyalty in so many?”

Having reached the Man in Black after a sacrifice of a young child in the relentless obsessive pursuit of that legendary Dark Tower, Roland ends up on a desolate beach, short a couple fingers and a toe and full of rapidly spreading infection thanks to a brief but memorable encounter with certain lobstrosities (did I mention how much I love King’s easy play with words and situations, combining horror and ridiculousness?) — and is about to fulfill his quest to draw three from “our world” to continue his madman’s pursuit of the Tower. And so he visits New York in 1987, 1964 and 1977 - mostly through the eyes of a young heroin addict Eddie Dean (about to be in some deep shit smuggling cocaine on the plane), Civil Rights activist Odetta Holmes (who has split personality with very unpleasant alter self - “the snakepit of hate and revulsion”), and Jack Mort (a monster in human form who has deep ties to quite a few parts of this story and a horrifyingly revolting “hobby”) — all while trying to not die from starvation, disease and Detta Walker in his reality.

“He had heard of drug stores getting held up for speed, for Bennies, for half a dozen other things (including Mrs. Rathbun's pre­cious Valium), but he thought this might be the first penicil­lin robbery in history.”

(Keflex is actually not penicillin, Mr. King, but I’ll let it stand.)
To those who expected more of the same feel of The Gunslinger this can be a bit of a jolt. This is no longer written by a very young King inspired by spaghetti Westerns and being all bleakly literary. This is King as we know and love him. The tone, the language — everything is different thanks to the inclusion of the 20th century perspective and point of view. The bleak seriousness is mostly gone — instead we get King’s snappy wordings, humor, a bit of grotesqueness and overwhelming feeling of reality - strange, yes, but reality nevertheless - that replaces the surreal dreamlike feel of its predecessor. 

This is King playing with the world in that instantly recognizable way that is his trademark.
  
This is the book where the quest for the Dark Tower really begins, the real first chapter following the extended prologue that was The Gunslinger. And this is the book where Roland of Gilead really comes to life, leaving the enigmatic Clint Eastwood-like detached and cold antihero behind and instead feeling like an actual living person, human at his core.

  “There are people who need people to need them. The reason you don't understand is because you're not one of those people. You'd use me and then toss me away like a paper bag if that's what it came down to. God fucked you, my friend. You're just smart enough so it would hurt you to do that, and just hard enough so you'd go ahead and do it anyway. You wouldn't be able to help yourself. If I was lying on the beach there and screaming for help, you'd walk over me if I was between you and your goddam Tower. Isn't that pretty close to the truth?”

And the real soul of Dark Tower books as far as I am concerned is introduced. Meet Eddie Dean, a former heroin junkie who, after some toilet humor and deadly naked shootout joins Roland semi-unwillingly on this quest. Eddie, whose chapters at the beginning made me howl in laughter as I am easily entertained, proudly unsophisticated and do not turn my nose up at bathroom humor. Eddie, who is lost and scared and yet brave and loyal, resilient and adaptable, who gives much-needed reality checks and a bit of gallows humor. And that bond he forges with Roland has actually touched me. Eddie and Roland, I love the team you guys make.

The deep annoyance - more than I recalled - came this time from Odetta/Detta. I forgot how terribly annoying both of them were, and how emotionally draining and exhausting Detta’s chapters are — and forever grateful to King for giving us Susannah instead, as she does not make me want to claw my eyes out. And yes, the case of insta-love between Eddie and Odetta is a bit of a misstep, as those love declarations come faster than those on “The Bachelor” — but hell, I’ll blame that all-reaching ka for it (or, as Eddie would aptly out it, “kaka”).

And yeah, all that lobstrosities talk is really putting me in the mood for seafood. 

4 stars. And now on to my favorite of the series, The Waste Lands - Shardik and Lud and Blaine the Pain.

  “If you have given up your heart for the Tower, Roland, you have already lost. A heartless creature is a loveless creature, and a loveless creature is a beast.” 

————

My review of The Gunslinger: https://www.goodreads.com/review/show...

———
Buddy reread with Fiona.