Rating: 5/5

There is a comment from author Paul Theroux suggesting that the tourist is certain, while the traveler is vague. Cees Nooteboom's Roads to Santiago: Detours &amp; Riddles in the Lands &amp; History of Spain is far more memoir than travel guide and the paths taken to reach Santiago de Compostela in Galicia, NW Spain are indeed vague--indirect, occasionally following back roads that become cul de sacs, at times quite whimsical peregrinations by a peregrino or pilgrim who travels by car rather than on foot, as countless others bound for Santiago have done over 7 centuries.

And yet, Nooteboom's personal, free-f0rm odyssey is a compelling one, if only the reader has a moderate curiosity about or interest in at least some of what fascinates the author: Spanish art (particularly the works of Francisco de Zurbarán) &amp; architecture (especially churches &amp; cathedrals of the Romanesque variety), the confluence of Moorish/Spanish history &amp; the interlaced influences of Muslims, Christians, Jews &amp; Visigoths on each other within Iberia over a millennium. 

Very importantly, Cees Nooteboom is a "man of letters", a phrasing not frequently attached today but one that fits the author, someone who takes a very keen interest in literature extending back to the classics. His extended Spanish travel transcription covers approximately 20 years of observations by a Dutchman who loves Spain &amp; has spent years of his life attempting to synthesize his experiences there. 

Oddly enough, Nooteboom is culturally a citizen of both Spain &amp; the Netherlands, while not feeling entirely comfortable in either. And, he is a master of words in a manner that ranges from very articulate phrasing to sheer eloquence; in fact, reading Roads to Santiago is like entering a linguistic domain, as much as it involves sharing in a recapitulation of Nooteboom's Spanish travel experiences.

Much of the book involves an excavation of Nooteboom's memory, with allusions to a time when he considered entering a Trappist monastery, his early years studying the classics as a student of Franciscans, previous forays into Spain, like an archeologist peeling back layer upon layer of personal as well as Spanish history, with the core of his experiences always just beyond his grasp. 

In places like the Monastery of Santo Domingo de Silos, the author's sense of belief in a Godly presence seems to flair, only to recede again, much as the light in the small, often ancient churches he finds along country roads seems shrouded in shadows but with glints of light revealing fragments of memory. This may sound unconvincing but for this reader, Nooteboom's prose is at times very pleasantly translucent.

Here is just a sample of Cees Nooteboom's prose:The church as the representation of a higher reality is not an astonishing concept, and that such a concept gives rise to a symbolic world is something you know if you have ever been in a Greek, Buddhist or Shinto temple--in all of them you see those magic sequences of overt &amp; covert meanings, where each image &amp; each object acquires its rightful place within the esoteric system. 

What is so appealing about Romanesque art is that it is the 1st all-inclusive expression of such a system in its own world. A Romanesque church is cosmogony (that which deals with the origins of the universe) pictured in stone. All is meaning, morality, metaphysics and it is not Christ on the cross who occupies the centre, as in Gothic art, but Christ in Majesty, lord of the universe, creator of that strange element in which the creation is vested: time. 

Within that concept everything had a meaning, from the wall to the lintel, from the vault to the baptismal font. The hunt, the seasons, the constellations, the symbols of guilt &amp; punishment, resurrection &amp; eternity, the bear &amp; the snake, the raised tail &amp; the pineapple, the chevron &amp; the crossed axes--everything had a meaning &amp; was legible even for those who could not read, a language of numbers &amp; signs you clung to in a universe in which, all being well, you felt at home or at any rate felt was yours and in which the temporary world &amp; your temporary existence was no more than a passing phase.Indeed, parts of this book are rather dense, replete with obscure terms, untranslated Latin, fanciful ruminations &amp; soulful considerations. To some it might resemble a professorial lecture, though Cees Nooteboom is not an academic &amp; never attended university. He is however quite intellectual in his pursuits but at times also wistful &amp; even humorous, as when he pays an entrance fee to enter the "actual home of Aldonza" from Don Quixote, a fictional character who seems vivid enough to many as to allow for such a whimsical visit. 

The author suggests that in just closing one's eyes all of Cervantes characters come quickly alive in La Mancha &amp; the places near it. He mentions that in such places, the world of the imagination takes hold replacing the ordinary, material world, which becomes "dreamlike, a zone where nothing is as it seems". And, he quotes Nabokov who said: We no longer laugh at the world of Cervantes &amp; his hero, his escutcheon is compassion, his banner is beauty. He stands for everything that is gentle, lost, pure, altruistic &amp; gallant.Towns like Silos and La Mancha are just 2 detours not on the road to Santiago and there are countless more that few travelers have heard of, dusty towns that don't appear on group tours but which make this unusual pilgrimage of interest. To be sure, this is not a guidebook for those planning a camino, a walking pilgrimage to Santiago, which Nooteboom describes asone of the arias of madness of European opera, a gigantic migratory flow, a movement of millions of extras, an unceasing stream of scallop-bearing pilgrims from all corners of Christendom, who found shelter &amp; sustenance en route from the Pyrenees &amp; beyond. What the massive adventure signified in terms of religious zeal, political, social, economic &amp; artistic influence is almost impossible to imagine. 

There are also numerous references to Italo Calvino, Jorge Luis Borges &amp; Umberto Eco, such that one is quickly aware that semiotics, or the search for meaning, is at the root of almost everything that Nooteboom engages in. 

With Cees Nooteboom, almost every town he enters becomes a kind of allegory and his investigations are almost taxonomic in scale but always exceedingly personal as well. And that is the beauty of Roads to Santiago, a work unlike any other I've read, a meditation encased in a travel memoir, which I found both nicely challenging and very fulfilling.

*Among the images included within my review are one of the author, Cees Nooteboom; another of the monastery at Santo Domingo de Silos; a view of the countryside near La Mancha; lastly, the interior of the cathedral at Santiago de Compostela, with giant botafumeiro (censer) at center/right.

**Cees Nooteboom, whose fictional work is also quite compelling &amp; who was said to have been a candidate for a Nobel Prize in Literature, died on Feb. 11th, 2026 at the age of 92. A well-cast obituary by Adam Nossiter appeared in The New York Times on Feb. 26th, 2026.