Rating: 5/5

I lived in Europe the entire second half of the 1980s and became completely detached from American culture. When I returned in the early 90s I felt like an alien, thoroughly incapable of understanding all the changes that had occurred while I was away those many years. Coupland's novel Generation X contained so many interesting observations and fundamental truisms about where American culture was going that it helped me grasp all the weirdness I too had observed since returning. 

I remember being totally fixated with television the first month I returned; so many cable channels and so much mindless and useless quasi-entertainment, and yet I couldn't get enough! And it was TV commercials that fascinated me the most, the way they made you feel as if you're a fucking loser if you didn't own what they were selling, whether it was the product itself or the persona that went along with the purchase; to be cool was to have ownership of the item and the hope of what this brought to your banal, mundane, loser life. I'm sure marketing and advertising had always promoted this idea since it first began, but with 24/7 cable TV one could relentlessly perpetuate this idea with greater efficacy and volume.

Moreover, my first post-military job was a difficult transition as I was clueless about how civilians conducted themselves in the workplace, with much different attitudes about work ethic, goals, and social interaction than how it was in the Army. I was overwhelmed and angst-ridden those first six months. The military had simple rules, lines of authority, and ideas about teamwork and goals within that framework. 

In the civilian world, the workplace was a complex minefield of confusing and baffling unwritten rules and attitudes that were wholly alien to me. People were more sensitive and less diligent, and leadership at every level was cowardly and passive-aggressive for the most part. In the military among my comrades, trust was one of the most absolute givens between us; we had each others backs because it was the only way to survive in a crisis situation. In the civilian workplace, trust was a laughable joke at best; no one had your back, and, in fact, getting stabbed in the back was a daily event even with those you thought you could trust. In the military, acts of selfless magnanimity were the norm; in the civilian workplace people were selfish and solipsistic. It was a confusing mess for me.

About that time I read Generation X, and its narrative helped calm me as the characters more or less echoed many of the sentiments I was experiencing as I re-entered American civilian life. There's really not much going on in the book except the characters expressing their thoughts, feelings, and anxieties about modern life as young adults trying to find their way in the last two decades of the 20th Century. I found their narratives to be fascinating, helpful, and best of all, their views were affirming many of my own.

It's a great book, revolutionary in some ways, as Coupland rightfully shows that people born after 1960 were not "Boomers" and part of that immense generation of Americans. People of Gen X were somewhere off on their own, less affected by the 1960s than the Boomers, and lost and confused during the rightward political shift of the Reagan years and the mass corporatization of work, art, and culture that happened in the 80s. Mass marketing was turning kids into mindless consumers, work was becoming impersonal with the rise of beehive-like "cubicle" work environments, and it was becoming difficult to find individual identity in an age of mass conformity and mass marketing.

Even the term Generation X, which was the name of a legendary but obscure English punk band from the 70s, was itself usurped by the marketing lords and turned into another capitalized, mass marketed, faux youth trend in the 90s. One second it was the theme of a great idea by a brilliant young novelist, the next it was used to sell clothes, music, soft drinks, and other affectations of a phony, pre-packaged lifestyle. Luckily Coupland's novel came out well before the ridiculous commercialization of his ideas.

It's difficult today to understand the immense impact this novel had when it was first published in 1991. As an ex-pat returning home after years of living abroad, I found the novel monumentally important as I tried to find my way back into the strange, new culture that was America in the 1990s. In many ways, some 25 years later, I have yet to fully return.