Rating: 4/5

I am inspired to read the celestial vision by James Redfield. I read the Celestine prophecy years ago and I enjoyed it. Redfield speaks about synchronicity. That is things happening in a certain way to allow us to fill our destiny. This is real life. I know that so many synchronistic occurrences have happened to me. I also know that I’ve missed a lot of them. We may squander mini synchronistic opportunities and miss that conversation or that connection that we’re supposed to have.

When I was hospitalized, I was treated so well and such love and kindness by so many medical professionals and I remember many of the names but some people are forgotten to me right now. I want to remember them all. And pray for them. And make them part of my life going forward as well.

I like Redfield’s vision. I’m sorry that he kind of ventures into the fringes of politics and probably his political leanings are somewhat different than mine. However, I do share his great concern for the environment and for human life, and that the government be fair and just, and not corrupt. He tries to give when he ventures into politics equal regard for what you might call a conservative view that people need to be responsible and. and that we don’t want what I’ll call secular government - government divorced from spiritual values to be trying to control things.

At this time, I’m also reading and studying through the great courses the communist ideology. And I’m fascinated by the revolutionary zeal that it inspired in a lot of people. They were dreaming of the ideal world. Unfortunately, they bought into a worldview based on destruction. Is a simple as that. Progress comes through cooperation through harmony through giving and receiving together. Revolution doesn’t bring progress. If that revolution is destructive.

I really do like this book. And there’s something special about Mr. Redfield. I hope I can meet him someday synchronistically. And I hope that I can understand my own truth and the message I need to bring into the world. And what I need to do before I pass away from this lifetime.

At the end of last year, I had four medical conditions, any one of which could’ve ended my life. But I’m still here. This Celestine vision reminds me that I have a reason for being here. I have a purpose and I want see it clearly and fulfill it.