Rating: 5/5

One of King’s best, up there with The Shining and The Stand.

King is able to terrify because he is adept at drawing us into a scene, luring the reader in with deft characterization and attention to detail that creates empathy and understanding.

In Francis Ford Coppola’s brilliant The Godfather part II, in the scene where a young Vito Corleone (played by Robert De Niro) shoots Fanucci, he wrapped his pistol in a towel and the cloth catches fire after the shots. That detail has stayed in my mind in greater clarity than the actual murder. Coppola drew us in to that grisly sight with detail that we can feel, a towel can get scorched and catch fire, and we become a part of what’s going on.

Likewise, in Steven Spielberg’s 1975 film Jaws, when Roy Scheider’s character is shoveling chum into the water, the shark surfaces right in front of Scheider. The audience laughs at the irreverent profanity, but then is immediately shocked at the monster’s appearance. Spielberg’s direction played us like a fiddle, drawing us in with humor and then, when we are open and vulnerable, scaring us with the surprise. 

King provides that kind of detail and can also play with our emotions. He understands and makes use of the technique of adding unusual but memorable detail and also mixes shades of humor in with the darker hues of terror to make the portrait more tangible. 

The Green Mile is also a minimalist statement about institutional life in America reminiscent of One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest. Set in the south during the great depression, King does not let us forget that these men endured this job because it was employment, one they were happy and lucky to have. But more than this, King’s description of prison life, like Kesey’s portrayal of mental hospitals and treatment, carries with it a sense of desperate inevitability, the harsh realities of this life come down the line like a freight train coming down a track, unavoidable and unstoppable. There is a detail from the book that I don’t think was included in the 1999 film, that was hard to take, injustice always is, but King’s depiction of this was more complicated than what could have been in the movie and so all the more heart wrenching.

A story about executioners, in this case a shift of prison guards working on death row and whose job it is to both care for the condemned inmates and then to actually carry out the sentence, is a setting custom made for King’s great talent. We are walked through the rehearsals for the executions (by electric chair) and then seen the performance of that instrument. We get to know the men who have this unenviable task and to also spend time with the men who await death in a prose similar in its sympathetic representation to Capote’s In Cold Blood.

John Coffey (played so well by Michael Clarke Duncan in the Frank Darabont film) was as tragic a figure as ever appeared in our literature and while a cursory comparison could be made to Lenny in Steinbeck’s Of Mice and Men, King’s inclusion of fantasy and supernatural elements adds an almost theological tone to the narrative. Clearly this is no coincidence as King describes several men as devout and Biblical references and symbolism are ubiquitous.

Highly, highly recommended.