Rating: 4/5

The Gulf War and invasion and liberating of Kuwait.

The Fist of God is a 1994 novel mixing known fact with fiction to tell a story of the coalition forces in the Persian Gulf War racing against time to discover the true nature of Saddam Hussein's secret weapon, 'The Fist of God.'
1931- Before this Kuwait was the 19th province os irag. Saddam wanted it back. Iraq's propaganda was that Kuwait had taken more than its share of the oil from the shared Rumailah oil field.Irag also owed Kuwait $15 billion they has loaned Iraq during its war with Iran(Iraq invaded Iran in 1980-1988) The Al Sabahs were asking for repayment.

Saddam was called "The Rais" by his loyals.

Saudi Arabia has the biggest oil fields in the world. Kuwait is second.

Oleg Vladimirovich Penkovsky, codenamed "Agent Hero" (Russian: April 23, 1919, , was a colonel with Soviet military intelligence (GRU) in the late 1950s and early 1960s who informed the United Kingdom and the United States about the Soviet Union placing missiles on Cuba, which led to the Cuban Missile Crisis.During his 30 month career he handed over 5.500 documents.

Stealth Fighters--Black. Shape is multiple angles created in such a way to reflect most of the radar waves directed at it and to absorb the rest into its own body(Shaped like a stingray).It does not bounce hostile radar waves back to the receiver and therby betray its position to the enemy

The Magic Flute (German: Die Zauberflöte, is an opera in two acts composed in 1791 by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart to a German libretto by Emanuel Schikaneder. The work is in the form of a Singspiel, a popular form that included both singing and spoken dialogue. Takes place in Egypt.The Magic Flute is noted for its prominent Masonic elements; Schikaneder and Mozart were Masons and lodge brothers
 Time: Egypt, about the reign of Rameses I.
Place: Near and at the Temple of Isis, Memphis.
Schikaneder had persuaded Mozart to compose the music to a puppet show for him. 
At that time, however, freemasonry was a much discussed subject. It had been interdicted by Maria Theresa and armed forces were employed to break up the lodges. As a practical man Schikaneder saw his chance to exploit the interdicted rites on the stage. Out of the wicked sorcerer he made Sarastro, the sage priest of Isis. The ordeals of Tamino and Pamina became copies of the ceremonials of freemasonry. He also laid the scene of the opera in Egypt, where freemansory believes its rites to have originated. In addition to all this Mozart’s beautiful music ennobled the libretto even in its dull and unpoetical passages, and lent to the whole a touch of the mysterious and sacred.
Because of its supposed relation to freemasonry, commentators have identified the vengeful Queen of the Night with Maria Theresa, and Tamino with the Emperor. Pamina, Papageno, and Papagena are set down as types of the people, and Monostatos as the fugleman of monasticism.