Rating: 5/5

This is the book that the film Lawrence of Arabia is loosely based upon. I say loosely, because after finishing the book I rented the film and watched it all the way through for the first time since I was a kid. It was only then that I realised that although the film is a magnificent piece of film-making, it is very inaccurate in places and often just simply wrong. 
 
T.E. Lawrence was much more extraordinary and his achievements and much more astonishing even than the amazing portrayal of him in the film. But, I suppose the difficulty of making a film of 'Lawrence of Arabia' is, how do you compress so much into so little time and how do you explain certain things simply and quickly. Hence the film seems to me now like a series of snapshots of events that did happen and some that didn't, but perhaps including the made up stuff to make the story on screen flows better.

T.E. Lawrence was like Indiana Jones and James Bond and some SAS type hero all rolled into one. This archaeologist’s assistant was turned down by the Army for being too short. He was no soldier, but he read Clausewitz and all the other great military theorists, created his own war and applied all he learned to great effect. Nobody told him to capture the strategic port of Aqaba - that was his idea. He didn’t even inform his superiors. He enrolled the Arab tribesman in the project, rode across the desert and took it. And that was almost just the start!

There are two books I was reminded of when going through Seven Pillars of Wisdom and they are 'My War Gone By, I Miss It So' by Anthony Lloyd and  'The Lord of The Rings'.
 
The first because I think this book is surprisingly personal or intimate for a book written shortly after WWI. I was at times actually quite shocked and disturbed by Lawrence’s thoughts and feelings. Not so much that he had them, but that a national hero, who turned down a knighthood and a Victoria Cross not to mention two Croix De Guerres, writing shortly after World War One, would share such things with the general public.
 
It made me think of  Lord Of The Rings  not only because what Lawrence did in mostly just two short years is an absolutely epic tale, but because so much of it revolves around ancestor worshiping/respecting tribesmen with bizarre sounding names from bizarre sounding places. So a typical paragraph may be Lawrences meeting with Maahmoud, renowned desert warrior of the Abu-Orense, son of Ali, scourge of the Waddi-Odd, blood enemies of the Abu Tayi, and so on. Fortunately It’s all online and you can search the text to see where those particular names came up before and avoid your head spinning with confusion.

I’m no judge of prose but it seems almost poetic at times. According to Michael Korda, author of  ‘Hero: The Life And Legend Of Lawrence Of Arabia’, Lawrence was a skilled writer and examination of his letters demonstrate he would very much alter his style depending on who he was writing to. Korda also describes Lawrence’s description in ‘Seven Pillars Of Wisdom’ of the attack on the train at Mudowwara as the very best of war writing. So much happens in just ten minutes and Lawrence’s style is perfect: the mine is detonated, the Turkish troops on the roofs machine gunned, some Turkish troops take shelter behind a bank and are hit with mortars, the train is looted, some Austrian officers and NCOs are taken prisoner, one of them pulls a pistol and they are massacred by the Arabs, Lawrence has time to reassure and old woman passenger and find her servant/slave, a badly wounded Arab, who Lawrence should have protected is left behind by mistake and Lawrence is distressed as he should have been killed as they cannot take him with them and the Turks will horribly kill the badly wounded, and so on. It makes me think of the helicopter attack scene in the film  Apocalypse Now  in that a lot happens in short space of time, much of it is horrible, some of it is incongruous and some of it weird, and you are on the edge of your seat trying to imagine what that must have been like. I found the battle scenes compelling. A.P. Wavell (later Field Marshall Wavell) wrote of Lawrence’s description of the battle of Talifah, that it was“one of the best descriptions of a battle ever penned”.
 
Aside from the battle scenes, many of the descriptions of the Arabs and their way of life are marvellous. It’s just a fantastic book, because its well written and fantastic story nearly every part of which could be independently verified - which is just astonishing. How many men have had such an adventure? Alexander the Great maybe? That’s the sort of League T.E. Lawrence ended up in.