Rating: 2/5

'Gabriel's Gift tells the story of 15-year old Gabriel, whose parents had just separated and now has to deal not only with being a teenager, but also his parents problems. Gabriel was born a twin but when he was a toddler his twin brother Archie died of meningitis. Now that he is a teenager his relation to his parents is not an easy one. Sometimes he feels that he is really loved and cared for but at others he it feels like he is the grown up one. Things shift when a famous pop star gives Gabriel a picture drawn by himself, both of his parents seem determined on having it for themselves.

Hanif Kureishi is a well respected author. His screenplay 'My Beautiful Laundrette' received an Oscar nomination, and one of the characters from that novel, Karim, even makes a cameo appearance here but somehow I just missed the whole point of this one and it was a disappointment to me. 

In some respects, the story is a good one, focusing as it does on the post-60s generation. Both of Gabriel's parents could be seen as being both comic and 'cool'. His father Rex, was once the bass player for 70s rock idol Lester Jones who was ousted from the band not because of any creative arguments or lack of talent but due to a freak accident, (he fell off his platform shoes breaking an ankle). But he starts the book as a work-shy layabout living in a squalid bed-sit. Nor was his transformation from loser to inspired music teacher terribly believable. Meanwhile his mother Christine, a one-time seamstress to pop stars, is now a waitressing 'party girl' bringing home a string of men-friends. In the end both simply come across as selfish, wallowing in nostalgia and bemoaning missed opportunities. Unfortunately Gabriel's character never really develops enough to carry the weight of the story. 

The narrative slips inconsistently between first and third person but my biggest issue was that I never really worked out what the 'Gift' in the title referred to. Was it Gabriel’s ability to bring his drawings to life, which simply peters out without explanation? Or was the Gift the picture that Lester Jones gave him? Or was it his hinted at, artistic genius? In truth I'm not sure just why this is on the 1001 list.