Rating: 4/5

The mist clears the clouds roll out and the fog lifts, looking down, the Nile appears. Its blue waters dominate the desert land, like a Lion over a savanna. And the hot sun is always shining bringing excruciating heat, which not even the Egyptians can tolerate for too long. The scene ancient Egypt, the life giving river flows leisurely by going north. But no human knows where it begins in the south, if it does have an end there. The eunuch slave Taita, loves Lostris daughter of the evil Grand Vizier Intef, of the kingdom of Upper Egypt (and owner of gentle Taita). Lord Intef has his chief guard Rasfer, beat his slave brutally for minor infractions, and Rasfer loves his work...The weak tired Pharaoh, has let Lower Egypt the delta kingdom slip away , and now there are two Egyptian nations in the 18th century ( B.C.)... But Taita has a viable rival the imposing warrior Tanus, rising star of the army and he has noble blood in his veins. The handsome eunuch is a genius, seemingly able to invent anything, he sets his mind to (except one). The quite intelligent man has such an overpowering love for the lovely Lostris, she adores him too (Hapi , the River God, is her patron). He is happy being a lowly slave as long as he sees her every day. Naturally Lostris loves Tanus, and he reciprocates. The slave's best friend is yes that same man, this strange triangle will last all their lifetimes. However during the feast of the great God Osiris, in the exotic city of Thebes with 250,000 souls the largest on the face of the Earth. The king sees the daughter of the Vizier in a play written by Taita, inside the sacred temple. The teenage beauty enchants him, the old Pharaoh Mamose the VIII marries her. She the heartbroken girl becomes one of his 200 wives, he has no sons but many daughters, the dynasty must continue! Tanus is devastate, along with her comes Taita and becomes very useful to the Pharaoh, in his Nile River palace on an island, many miles from the capital Thebes. The talented slave even begins to like the pleasant monarch, physician to the mighty king, architect to the building of his tomb. Which almost bankrupts the wealthy desert kingdom, scribe, inventor and fortune teller he can do anything, he wished it was true. Ruthless invaders from the east the Hyksos, barbarians, invincible with never seen animals (horses) pulling countless strange vehicles (chariots). Having destroyed the red kingdom of the north, sacking its capital Memphis, killing the usurper king and now are coming up stream in war galleys. With thousands of troops by land too, the white kingdom of the south is doomed. After a bloody battle, defeat the southerners, they must flee up the river . In their own boats, the fleet slowly turns away heading southerly, from their island headquarters a paradise in a turbulent world, green, with trees in Egypt! The palaces are abandoned Taita, Lostris, Tanus the Pharaoh's son and many thousands of others are on board. As the Hyksos pursue them, never stopping the chase, and still a vague plan to return someday . Floating, forever floating the royal galleys go up the endless river...