Rating: 4/5

I think I must have been in my mid or late teens when I came across the movie adaptation of this novel on TV. I don't remember much about it, only that the movie must have just started and that I recognised William Hurt and Raul Julia, and that I was immediately drawn in by the chemistry between the two. I looked the movie up just now and was surprised to find that they actually filmed the movie scenes that Molina (Hurt) relate from memory to Valentin (Julia). All I recall from the movie is the two of them talking.

In the novel, that's basically what takes place. Two people are stuck in a prison cell together, and they talk. Molina is serving eight years for the "corruption of a minor". He is what I now recognise as a trans woman, but to the Argentinian authorities he is simply a sexual deviant. (I use the pronoun "he" because that's how Molina is seen by most characters in the book, and consequently the pronoun the author uses.) Valentin is imprisoned for being a political deviant, a left wing extremist. Personally he sees himself as fighting for a just cause.

Molina wants only to live as a woman, and to love and be loved, but also believes that to be a woman is to submit to a man and to center your life around him. Valentin believes that having strong attachments is a liability that will make it harder to do what needs doing and make the necessary sacrifices. But he also believes that relations between a man and a woman need to be on equal terms.

To pass the time in their cell, Molina narrates from memory his favourite movies while these two disparate prisoners slowly get to know each other. Movie scenes, cell life, and past life weave in and out of each other, and it is sometimes difficult to distinguish which of the two characters is responsible for a stray thought. Somewhat oddly the book also contains footnotes detailing the various theories around the cause of homosexuality and how it relates to sexual repression and control. The Freudian parts were bonkers, but I found the later discussions of bourgeois homosexuality and the subjugation of women rather fascinating (and very much in thread with my own personal rejection of formal marriage, but that's another story.) I'm still not entirely sure the footnotes fit in with the book, or what exactly Puig was going for with their inclusion except that at the time of writing homosexuality was widely viewed as mental illness and illegal in most(?) of the world. And Puig seems very much ahead of his time. 

I spent most of the book wondering how it would all play out in the end and what the title had to do with anything. And I could probably spend a long paragraph just discussing the ambiguous nature and imagery of the title, but that would be a spoiler.

In short - recommended, and I would like to read more by Manuel Puig.