Rating: 3/5

What a mess. I think this work runs the fine line between genius and s&amp;%t and even though I am a huge WSB fan, i suspect it may fall into the latter category on this occasion.
Having said that, there are some chapters (Celluloid Kali) which are wonderful. If you are new to Burroughs' work, do NOT start here. 
Start with Junky or Queer which are his two early masterpieces or read the Final Trilogy, especially The Western Lands, which I believe is his best book. 
This is a short read though so I do believe it is worth having a quick look at this, even if it's just to see how revolutionary Burroughs was, not only in his own time but even by today's standards of literature which seem to have slipped back (most unfortunately) into what I perceive to be mostly disappointing conservative or 'pop' writing.
The interesting thing about reading this book though is the EXPERIENCE for the reader. At first, it seems to make absolutely no sense whatsoever but through the use of repetition, to be more specific repetitive imagery which is either graphically sexual or bleak, the semblance of a story or half-story starts to form in the mind. Remember Burroughs' intention in writing in this style was to break down the regular patterns or tracks of thought within language which he describes like a virus which invades and attaches itself to our bodies. I'm looking forward to the next instalment though - The Nova Express and I have heard that the finale of the series - The Ticket that Exploded is the best.

February 2024 - my thoughts on this book second time round. 

About a year or two ago, someone told me that there are about FOUR different versions of The Soft Machine. This sparked my curiosity and decided to find one of the latter versions to see if it made more sense. And the edition that I tracked down is from 2010 (although I haven't read the so-called 'Restored Text' by Oliver Harris yet). 

This time round my impression is quite different. This book is still nuts, I mean really nuts, but in both good and bad ways. 
It's like a glitchy memory movie which skips forward and backwards all the time. There's plenty of homoerotic scenes and Burroughs' 'rectal mucuous' is an image he constantly comes back to. There are some parts that are superbly written - they read like old seedy sepia peep-show late 1920s prose poetry. Disgusting? Yes, quite often. But what I realized this time round is that Burroughs' filthy writings are not necessarily a reflection of his own obsessions or mind, but more of a satirical reflection of the depraved and corrupt world we all live in, which seems to be getting worse all the time. In this sense, he is a very important writer, but this book is difficult, and will demand your full attention. At times, I almost felt like giving this four stars because some passages were stunning in their .....running through the word halls of my memory ...... stark depravity and vivid obscenity - a sort of defiant decadence, if that makes sense. 

What I also appreciated about this book this time is how the last 1/4 of each chapter or episode is a cut-up of phrases and images from the first 3/4 of that same chapter so it gives the reader a feeling of the flashback, either akin to a drug-induced hallucination or the moment before death when your whole life flashes before your eyes. 

I strongly recommend reading one of the later revised editions of The Soft Machine not the early 1961 edition, which does not make sense at all to me.