Rating: 5/5

Eco:" We have a limit, a very discouraging, humiliating limit: death. That's why we like all the things that we assume have no limits and, therefore, no end. It's a way of escaping thoughts about death. We like lists because we don't want to die".
Interview in Der Spiegel, November 11, 2009 

 UPDATE Thank you Eco...!

Umberto Eco, 84, Best-Selling Academic Who Navigated Two Worlds, Dies
By JONATHAN KANDELLFEB. 19, 2016
in: http://www.nytimes.com/2016/02/20/art...

  

Stultus! Whom do I talk to? 
Miserable you are! What do I try?
I tell about my pain,
To the foolish seaside,
To the speechless stone,
To the deaf wind,
Ai, and nobody answers, 
But the murmuring of waves. 
[my translation]

  

(Giovan Battista Marino)

  
 

I just started reading it and it looks so fine.

  

Photo-phobic Roberto de La Grive survived the wreckage of his ship Amarilli, a fluyt (in Dutch) or, as the English said, a Flyboat.

It's year 1643. Moribund Roberto, on a piece of wood, is all alone in the ocean until he hits another Flyboat: the Daphne. He gets on board, soon to conclude the ship has been deserted. 

He finds enough food, writes love letters (to "she", the "sun of his shadow"), "proud of his humiliation". Where is he? And what about that Island he envisions, though seemingly unreachable, because he doesn't know how to swim...

 "Sun of my shadows, light of my darkness.
Why did Heaven not unmake me in that tempest it had so savagely provoked
Why save from the all devouring sea this body of mine, only to wreck my soul
so horribly in such mean and even more ill-starred solitude!
...
My Lady, I write you as if to offer, unworthy tribute, the withered rose of my disheartenment. And
yet I take pride withal in my humiliation, and as I am to this privilege condemned, almost I find joy in an abhorrent salvation; I am, I believe, alone of all our race, the only man in human memory to have been shipwrecked and cast upon a deserted ship".

Roberto dislikes the daylight, yet, to him, the moonlight is beautiful; nights are meant to find new constellations ...

Roberto starts the exploration of the ship. Luckily, he finds water…and fruits. But he’s suspicious: there’s the sensation of the insidious; he’d heard strange sounds; plus, he’s deciphered some Latin words in the captain’s log: “quase dicitur Bubonica pestis”. The pest he had had when 13. 

Now he’s got a gun, and sword and a knife. As day breaks, he seeks refuge. From the island he recognized a diversity of birds' sounds: swallows, parrots….; even crickets’. 

  
 

Roberto now remembers his life in Milano; the days at Casale; the Pozzo family; 16 years before 1640; his childhood rearing. He was a loner, having had a preceptor who taught him French. 

Roberto thrived on imagination, fed by his reading of poetry and romances. 

 
  

"He discovered some rough fruits that he would not have dared touch, if one of them, falling to the ground and splitting open in its ripeness, had not revealed a garnet interior. He
ventured to taste others, and judged them more with the tongue that speaks than with the tongue that tastes, since he defines one as a bag of honey, manna congealed in the fertility of its stem, an emerald jewel brimming with tiny rubies. Now, reading between the lines, I would venture to suggest he had discovered something very like a fig".

Though priest Emanuel, back in Italy, convinced him about the Ferrante’s (his doppelgänger?) inexistence, Roberto, while on board the Daphne, cannot help conjecturing: he’s not alone, there’s someone else onboard. 

Emanuel was a priest and philosopher, a follower of Democritus and Epicurus. 

Roberto tries to concentrate on his survival: he’s got food for weeks, but not for months. He’s got to reach the island. Maybe there, he’ll eat of the fruit of the Tree of Oblivion; and forget about it all; and find peace. He likens Daphne to a theater of memory. 

He's spotted the South Crux constellation. 

In his memories, Roberto recalls the city under siege, his first love with the peasant, red-hair Ana Novarese, the one who had the courage to hold a gun and got hit; his letters to her, but also his losses: his father, his friend Saint Savin. Due to the plague, he’ll get sick too and will lose sick Novarese. Yet he'll recover. 

Mines are exploding in the besieged city; vast conjectures on the power of the machines take over. Roberto gets the advice from his master Salazar and La Saletta. When the war gets over, he returns to his village, takes care of his mother till her death and a new chapter opens up in his life: Paris.

On board the Daphne Roberto dreams about the dented wheels; and finds a room full of clocks, of many types. What for? Someone must be taking care of them, because they’re working. Roberto takes a decision: to catch his malignant alter ego: the Ferrante; yet, due to the booze found, he looks like a fool. 

  
 

  
 

Back in Paris: recollections of palaces, the nobility, his studies on “crepuscules” and “sympathy powders” eliciting healing. And the lady he meets: Lilia. But all would end, because he gets arrested under charges of conspiracy. 

Cardinal Mazarino will offer Roberto a way out: he’s got an offer: a mission. Roberto accepts it. He’ll have to embark in the Dutch Amarilli ship, under the command of an English captain: Doctor Byrd.

Roberto’s mission is to know more about this secret: “the fixed point” or, in other words: the answer to the longitude problem. He’ll fake insomnia and ignorance, as well as photo-phobia; he’s now a spy for France. Even red-haired Byrd is faking, not revealing the real purpose of his travel to the Pacific Ocean. He’d been collecting flower specimens along the voyage. 

Now there's real action, because conjecture abounded thus far. Roberto has found out the intruder on board: a man, a priest, called Gaspar. The priest urges Roberto to learn how to swim. Roberto tries and tries again. Gaspar tries his own way to reach the Island, inside a Campanula; and disappears. 

All alone again, Roberto is back on his memories of Lilia and Ferrante. This one seems very real; he too had organized a voyage in search of the previously referred point. Ferrante wanted to subtract Lilia from Roberto. 

As for conjectures, they verse on the vacuum and infinity, the plurality of worlds, the inhabitants of the moon, and the Orange Dove. Nevertheless, Roberto is not a philosopher, rather: an unhappy lover. 

  

Roberto in his diving gets hurt by the stone-fish; it produces fever and sleep; and visits to Vessalia; a hell where God doesn’t exist. 

He still thinks and dreams about his rival Ferrante.

Especially this dream gives the whole sense to the title of the book. The case is that Ferrante had a mutiny on his voyage; his body was thrown into an island, above 25 degrees of latitude. Lilia too, was thrown to the sea, “navigating” on piece of wood. But all is a nightmare of Roberto: Ferrante being killed; Ferrante facing Judas whose punishment is to live forever on Holy Friday.

Roberto is remorse ridden for not having attained to the Island. He might have saved Lilia. 

...

The last words of the book are conjectures, still. On who might have had access to Roberto’s papers? Maybe Tasman…maybe Captain Blight in 1798…, maybe….

This is a well accomplished book into the Philosophy of 17th/18th centuries. Philosophy of Science. 
Worthwhile, the reading. A way into thinking and reflection. Even rocks don’t escape conjecture: how do they think? Roberto had pondered on that too. 

  

For a while I've read,...under Bocage*'s eye.

  
 

* from Wiki:
Manuel Maria Barbosa du Bocage (15 September 1765 – 21 December 1805) was a Portuguese Neoclassic poet, writing at the beginning of his career under the pen name Elmano Sadino.