Rating: 5/5

India Opal and her father, the preacher, have moved from Watley to Naomi, Florida. Opal had to leave all her friends behind and she’s adapting to living in a new place. Her mother has abandoned her and she’s feeling very sad and lonely. Her father preaches at a church he opened that was previously a convenience store. He works too much and he struggles to move forward as he misses Opal’s mom so much. Opal wishes she had a better relationship with him. She hasn’t found very many new friends yet. After her father sends her to the local Winn-Dixie to pick up a few grocery items, she meets a dog in the produce section that will change her life forever. She names him Winn-Dixie and their relationship grows. Along with Winn-Dixie, she meets multiple people around town including Gloria, a near-blind woman who many think is a witch, a librarian named Miss Franny Block with an interesting story, an ex-convict named Otis who runs the local pet store, two really annoying boys, and two girls of different ages that she can’t seem to figure out. She soon learns that people all have their own sadness and difficulties. She realizes that she may not be the only one who’s experiences loss and sadness.

Eventually, she opens up to her father and confronts him by asking the questions she needs answered about her mother. Her father has suffered a great deal, but he’s trying very hard to live his life and provide for Opal, he just needs help breaking out of his shell as Opal puts it. All the characters in the book are brought together by a garden party at the end of the story. Opal learns that it’s important to cherish the friends you have in the present and that it’s also important to move on. The book contains themes of sadness, friendship, acceptance, abandonment, loneliness, and love to name a few.

I read this with my kids and loved all of the characters–I seemed to connect with each and every one of them, especially Otis. Readers are reminded to think before they act, to never judge someone because of how they look, and to have empathy for others, including animals. Many people have a past and this story teaches you that it’s okay to move on and to appreciate what you have and to love the people you have in your life at that very moment. The book is written in a very easy to read manner, perfect for elementary readers. It’s a heartwarming read that I highly recommend to people of all ages.

My rating is 5*****