Rating: 5/5

What a great book to end with (though I wish there were more)! I loved watching Ramona become so mature and make a best friend! 

On the language as that was my biggest concern when we first started these books - Ramona and Beezus use words like stupid and dumb occasionally and some other kiddish words with ill intent. I grew up in a house that was not allowed to say anything even remotely mean like that so I really cringe through those words. However! I would say 80 percent of the time in Ramona, regret and shame is expressed after calling someone a bad name. Oftentimes, a brokenness in the relationship is acknowledged internally and a desire to make things right. An apology does not always happen but for me that was enough. It showed a desire to not do it again and has several really great points where Beezus and Ramona work things out together and are able to reconcile and forgive even without the direction of their parents. That to me has been such a valuable demonstration of a sisterly relationship that I haven't minded the name calling. I will also say that my kids haven't started using those words either 😂

Honestly, I was more bothered by the tantrums evident in the first few books and the lack of relationship at times between Ramona and her mother. But overall I think most often behaviors displayed in the books are appropriate to children those ages and are corrected or talked through in some way!

I don't want to romanticize the books at all. This is not the Boxcar Children where everyone gets along. The choices made by the characters are occasionally poor choices. But more often than not the mental conversation behind them is a desire for good and a vision of the fight between the flesh and the spirit that we all experience. They are not a picturesque family by any means but the realism has been a beautiful thing for my girls.

I also appreciate that they go to church and Ramona often seeks God's wisdom or help in times of need through prayer and I thought that was very sweet!