Rating: 5/5

“Think of an idea for world change, and put it into action”

These are the words that social studies teacher Reuben St. Clair wrote on the blackboard for an extra credit assignment for his class on his first day at that school. Some kids did it, successfully or not. One child, Trevor McKinney, did the assignment and changed the world.

Trevor is just an ordinary 13 year old who had an extraordinary idea: what if you helped someone, anyone, in a big way, and instead of paying it back, they paid it forward, and helped other people in a big way, and those people payed it forward, and on and on, until everyone was looking for ways to help others. Trevor decided he needed to help three people, and tell each of them to pay it forward to three other people. He first helps a homeless man by giving him some of his paper route money. He helps him buy some new clothes and allows him to shower at his house, which appalls his mother Arlene. The man, Jerry, is then able to get a job. Trevor then sets his sights on playing matchmaker with his mom and Reuben, who he thinks need each other. He also starts helping out his elderly neighbor, Mrs. Greenberg, by tending her garden. But Trevor doesn’t know if any of his efforts have worked, if anyone is paying it forward, and he feels like he has failed in his assignment. Little does he know how wrong he is.

There are wonderful characters in this book, my favorite being Trevor, who is guileless, earnest and loving. Reuben is a complex man, horribly physically and emotionally scarred from his time in Vietnam. Arlene is a single mother, carrying a torch for Trevor’s no good father and trying to work her AA program to maintain her sobriety. Chris is a freelance journalist looking for his next big story. There are a few other characters, and each chapter is told from someone’s POV. At times this can get a bit confusing, since it’s not always clear how a minor character fits into the story and why we are reading about them. But it is all resolved by the end.

This book is 15 years old, and by now most people have heard about the “pay it forward“ movement of unbridled altruism. This is the book that started it all. It is unabashedly uplifting, just the kind of book we all need in our lives. Yes, there are sad parts, and other parts that will make you laugh out loud (Trevor is just so refreshing	!) But mostly this book will fill your heart with joy.

An absolute recommend!