Rating: 5/5

My first Jane Austen, and goodness gracious me! It was so delightful, my only regret is I waited so long to read it.

For me, classics have always been intimidating. English isn't my first language, and I remember struggling in high school, trying to make heads and tails of whatever archaic passages we were forced to read with nary a success. Fast forward to adulthood, and my attempts at classics were yet again met with boredom and hardly any returns for the amount of hours spent. (I'm looking at you, Anna Karenina).

So even though there's so much love for Jane Austen, and I've been curious for quite some time, I held off. I didn't want to put the effort in, only to be bored out of my mind for tens of hours, reading and rereading long paragraphs of ideas and norms which no longer applied and quite frankly, no one cared. (Yeah, Anna Karenina really traumatized me.)

But slowly and surely, my curiosity could no longer be held off, and my questionable experiences with classics were softened in my memories with time gone by. So I braced myself and dove into Pride and Prejudice with equal parts excitement and apprehension.

And at first, I thought I'd made a terrible mistake. The writing was as impenetrable as I feared, the characters a bit silly, and the domestic drama too outdated to really appeal to a modern reader. But then, after a few chapters of really soldiering on, something miraculous happened. It was like a switch had flipped and my mind crossed over into 19th century England. The writing, the characters, the drama—they all came alive, and from that moment on, I was hooked.

Everyone's always talking about how witty Jane Austen is, and boy on boy, they're not kidding. The dialogue is just one zing after another, leaving me in wonder after almost every sentence. I often found myself lingering and savoring, just to make sure I got every bit of pleasure out that I could.

I was riveted, as riveted as I'd ever been with any contemporary book of any genre. And maybe that surprised me more than anything else. I expected a slog, one I'd have to wade through with much reluctance and under duress. Instead, I'd found that magical, liminal space between the real and the fictional, and proceeded to occupy it with such ferocity, I blew through the book and hardly surfaced for breath. 

The domestic and matrimonial dramas within still felt fresh and relevant to today, even though surely we've come far in the last few hundred years. And the characters still rang true with all their strength and weaknesses. In short, I think Austen pressed in on the foibles of human nature, and I'm certain those will never become irrelevant, no matter where our society is headed.

One thing that's really interesting about reading a book like this is knowing just how influential it will come to be and thus being able to experience the story from that angle. So many books and even entire genres (hello, regency romance!) have followed in the footsteps of Jane Austen, and to see their inspiration is as fascinating as it is illuminating.

All this praise isn't to say this is an easy read, per se. After all, the book was written hundreds of years ago and the constantly evolving nature of language, being what it is, has moved past this more convoluted and restrained style. But if you're willing to put in the effort, especially at the beginning, this is one of those books that does richly reward you for your hard work.

I will say, it's a good thing I don't live back in the day. I'm such a literal and straightforward person, I can totally see myself bumbling around in the 19th century, offending everyone, embarrassing the family name, and agreeing to all sorts of marriages without any inkling of what I'd done.

If ever there was a book that could be a gateway drug to anything, it would be this book to Jane Austen for me. I feel like the floodgates have opened, the dam burst, the Pandora's box unsealed. And the only way forward is to read more Jane Austen.

~~~~~~~~~~~~
See also, my thoughts on:
Sense and Sensibility
Emma
~~~~~~~~~~~~

✧ Connect with me ✧ Instagram ✧