Rating: 4/5

Stabbing a man to death is not as easy as it sounds; after all, it took 23 swipes at poor old Julius Caesar, but only one of them was actually deemed fatal. It takes a hell of an effort. 
Not like that seen in those pathetic slasher movies, where a big breasted peroxide blonde is chased around a mansion by a nutcase bearing a huge blade that only dishes out flesh wounds.

Chronicling the murder of one Santiago Nasar in a small unnamed South American village, Márquez dazzles in a fictional world that is as pungently sharp as the knives used to kill, it's a murder everyone in town knew was coming, yet no one wanted. ''Never was a death more foretold.'' says the the novels narrator, recounting the events of that fateful day, in fact, it's many years later where the story is told from, using the recollections of various townsfolk, a picture is slowly built up of just "who" and "why" this horrendous act took place. The purpose is less to do with trying solve any mystery, as the deed was committed in broad daylight, by two brothers, who understood their sister had been dishonored by Nasar, it's more based on the determination to try and understand why no one was able to prevent the death from happening. Spare in tone and somewhat bizarre it's a clever piece of writing that explores the nature of complicity and fate, and of how an act of savage intent can effect so many lives over time. 

Márquez utilizes mysticism and spirituality in his writing that represents culture, and symbolizes meaning within the context of the work. The death of Santiago may not have been avoided, partially due to the strange inabilities of his characters to connect with their spiritual powers. Both Santiago’s mother and his god-mother are unable to ‘truly feel his demise’. Mostly random thoughts and actions of several different people contribute to altering the course of that murderous day, with the fate of Santiago totally left in the hands of others.
Although a quick read, what I admired the most was the fact it's a deeper story than you think, it's not just the death of one, but the suffering of many, those who are burdened with failed responsibilities, the knives may have been in the hands of the killers, but seemingly the whole village also has a tight grip around them, this makes the story all the more powerful and ultimately
sad in the end, leaving an open wound on the people, unlikely ever to heal.