Rating: 5/5

I found my audiobook copy of THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE by Amy Tan on Scrib'd!

Winnie has finally reached a point in her life when she must come clean with her daughter about who she was before she became a refugee sum American and a mother. Such secrets she has always hidden, professed to protect her daughter. More likely, she also needed to protect herself. Some history, war history, cannot be scrubbed clean with the voice, cannot be made fresh by airing out. But her history was not hers alone, still is not. Someone with whom she shares the story is ready to tell it. And so she must as well, at least to her own daughter.

This book is mostly comprised of the memories Winnie shares of her life in various locales in China during WWII. She shares about a life of unbelievable hardship-- a horribly abusive husband who beat and raped her, harmed their children, wasted away their money and left them in abject poverty, and all the while demanded the utmost deference and subservience from her. She could get no help from her community, which was deeply mistrustful and judgmental of women. And during it all, she exercised astounding patience and cleverness, just waiting for her opportunity at freedom.

For me, this was a challenging book to listen to, as Winnie endured many horrible things. She was trapped from every direction, I felt desperate on her behalf at many points in the story. Please accept this as my trigger warning for extreme instances of physical, emotional, and sexual violence against women and children, and loss of fetus. This is a truly heartbreaking story, and also an inspiring story of what one woman is able to suffer in silence, waiting for her moment, so she might escape to a better life.

THE KITCHEN GOD'S WIFE is my first book from Amy Tan but I'm looking forward to reading many more books from her.

Rating: 🎫🎫🎫🎫 / 5 stolen plane tickets
Recommend? Absolutely!
Finished: April 5 2023
Read this if you like:
🏠 Domestic drama
🏘 Small town stories
🕰 Historical fiction 
🌄 Redemption stories 
✈️ Refugee stories
👩 Diverse authors and stories