Rating: 2/5

Modernist experiment by ex-falangist. Like Frankenstein, this is probably an epistolary novel wherein the addressee never receives the epistles. That unanswerability is the tragedy of form; the tragedy of content is that addressee died, presumably in the world war, and the narrator, addressee’s mother, has lost her mind therefor.

A preface added to a later-uncensored edition lays out a bizarre geometric theory: characters are identified as platonic solids, here dodecahedron and icosahedron (or as “vegetable cucumbersome ones”). The censor had cut out certain scenes (typically sexual, associated with the grotesque realism of Cela’s tremendismo)--these scenes are listed out as castrations as well as corruptions of the perfect platonist geometry of the text. So, yeah.

The text could be read is tragic epistolary novel or as collection of short shorts because the narrator writes a letter a day to her dead son, each with its own concern, but there’s no macro-narrative development. The letters are collections of petty observations, snide prejudices, and so on: we are told, fr’instance, that, were orphans and the impecunious given cigarettes, “there would be from then on many fewer people classified as orphans or needy to receive welfare,” presented as a lament that it has not yet been done (chapter 129). There’s also some nifty pregnant bits, such as the uncle who collects rivers, which collection mother inherits and wishes to set free (chapter 76) and the predicted coming of the super compass, “a hysterical little needle that will point off many more norths than necessary” (chapter 85). 

One refrain is the interpenetrations of the world market, such as reference to the son’s training voyage, which stopped at many places around the world, where he purchased many manufactures from still other places: “And now I see the list of your purchases,” “the collection of postal cards which you kept sending me, like a dutiful son, from all over the world, with a cold sensation of strangeness” (chapter 130). It’s strange because she is nothing if not a feudal monarchist: “let us defend our own monarchy for it is the last stronghold of our heart” (chapter 43). Progressive developments such as inchoate globalization will not be satisfactory. She is nevertheless concerned that “if the colored peoples disappeared suddenly, who would fill the immense vacuum which they would leave in the world?” (chapter 124), noting that it’s best that “the colored peoples, by dint of listening to us, realized in time that the best and most relaxed thing was to let us have our way.”

The central conceit, famously, is that the letters, to the extent that there is a sustained narrative, reveal the mother’s incestuous desire for her dead son. She insists on wearing “black silk lingerie” for him, but is willing to compromise with “pastel shades adorned with a simple little bit of white lace” (chapter 31). There are other more subtle hints throughout, but it culminates in mother’s dream that “you and I were getting married” (chapter 204). This does not stop her from writing letters about her non-incestuous liaisons, which is also weird, such as the “lawyer without cases” inter alia. 

Plenty of weirdness and nifty insights on display, and writing (in translation at least) is proficient at sentence level.

Recommended for those to whom the devil appears almost every night, people who would be proud to make a sybarite of you, and readers who think the strangest and healthiest women have a scorpion’s nest in their bosoms, a crowd of scorpions lashing them on their high powerful breast.