Rating: 5/5

I have no clear idea why people don’t like this book, because I do really think that is one of the most luminous Eco’s novels. The form of The Island of the Day Before (1994) could seem very simple, but it is not true. As often for Eco’s literal strategy he tries to mask a various citations, allusions and parallels with cultural and historical basis. Every novel looks like intertextual garland of signs and senses which are masterly contained into historical or philosophical fiction, detective or thriller.

The main plot of the third novel is about Italian nobleman who is the only survivor of a shipwreck during a fierce storm. He finds himself stranded on board the Daphne, a boat anchored just offshore an unreachable island. Without wind, without crew, and without a knowing how of swimming, Roberto explores his new 'prison', having survived a shipwreck of the vessel Amaryllis.

The land made a kind of bend, edged with sand that gleamed white in the pale darkness; but, like any shipwrecked man, Roberto could not tell if it was an island or a continent

Roberto tells us about his childhood, the invention of his twin Ferrante (does Eco play with archetype of twins?), his love Lilia, his initiation as a spy for Cardinal Richelieu and others. I personally like the story about the mapping the latitudes and longitudes of the planer which transforms into the philosophical reflection about borders of our world. Various details, facts and thoughts create a unique universe by Roberto’s imagination. As always, we cannot discern where reality ends and imagination starts. Otherwise, does it really matter anyway?

The smallest detail being lifelike: the reek and creak of the hull, the smell of the plants, the cries of the birds – all collaborated in forming the impression of a presence that was nothing but the effect of a phantasmagory perceived only by the mind…

I agree that it is not the best Eco’s novel. But it is completely enough of great ideas and findings that make this text an excellent present of all serious readers and Eco’s fans as well.

4,5