Rating: 4/5

Zeno is a good-hearted comic anti-hero. Everything works against him and just about everything he does to improve himself makes things worse. “I have, and have always had, a strong impulse to become better; this is perhaps my greatest misfortune.” 

We start with a full chapter about him trying to quit smoking cigarettes. He keeps track of his “last cigarette” which must by now number in the hundreds. “I explained to him [his doctor] that giving up three meals a day seemed to me nothing compared with the task of making a fresh resolution every moment not to smoke another cigarette…I was really suffering from my resolutions much more than from the cigarettes.” 

The novel is structured as a diary published by his doctor who was psychoanalyzing him. Zeno kept the account as part of his therapy. Much of the novel takes place in Trieste in northern Italy around the time of WW I. 

Let's take his marriage. Zeno has an older friend, a businessman who takes him under his wing. The older man has three daughters of marriageable age. Zeno courts the two good-looking daughters and ignores the third one whom he considers ugly. Guess which daughter he marries? That’s how Zeno’s life goes. 

Zeno goes into business with his brother-in-law, the man who married one of Zeno’s wife’s beautiful sisters. They're in the wholesale business. Neither man has any aptitude for business and they mainly chase the secretary around her desk. Luckily Zeno has a stream of money coming in from inherited wealth.

Zeno has an affair and he manages to develop a relationship where, when he is with his mistress, he wishes he were with his wife, and vice-versa. 

I’m sure his shrink considered him a challenging case. LOL

Now, this is fascinating. The book was set about the time of WWI and it was published in Italy in 1923, way before atomic bombs. Here’s a prescient passage from the very last paragraph of the book: “When all the poison gases are exhausted, a man, made like all other men of flesh and blood, will in the quiet of his room invent an explosive of such potency that all the explosives in existence will seem like harmless toys beside it.” Wow. 

I thought it was a good read and I enjoyed it, as I did another one of the author’s novels, Emilio's Carnival. My rating of 4 is a 4.5 for quality writing rounded down for being a bit overly lengthy and dragged out in places. This book, Confessions of Zeno, is also translated into English as Zeno’s Conscience. With 25,000 ratings, it's Svevo's most popular book on GR. 

The author (1861-1928) was a relatively unknown writer even in Italy until James Joyce, who lived in Trieste for more than ten years, spoke highly of his work. [And, according to a comment by my Goodreads friend Nick Grammos, Svevo helped out Joyce financially.] 

As we are told in the introduction to Emilio’s Carnival, Svevo himself was a model for Leopold Bloom in Ulysses, and Svevo’s red-blonde-haired wife inspired the character Anna Livia Plurabelle in Joyce’s novel Finnegans Wake. After praise from Joyce, Svevo, who had given up writing, went on to write this book that some consider his masterpiece, Confessions of Zeno. (Others think Emilio’s Carnival is his best work.) Svevo was a pioneer of the psychological novel in Italy. 

Top photo of Trieste in the late 1800s from Wikimedia
The author on an Italian stamp from findyourstampsvalue.com

[Revised 8/15/25]