Rating: 4/5

i'm so glad i took the time to read about the life of jazz singer billie holiday. i recently read Billie Holiday, a dismal graphic novel which focuses only on billie's suffering. after this, i felt i owed it to her to read a more balanced account of her life.

and wow, she endured so much. the first chapter alone depicts a lifetime worth of trauma. particularly unexpected: one afternoon when she was a young child, billie lay down with her grandmother to take a nap. cuddled up with billie, her grandmother died in her sleep, and billie woke with her grandmother's arm stiff and dead around her neck. billie had an intense fear of death after this incident.

i don't want to list all of her traumas; there are many horrific things. but each of these tribulations is recounted with humor and honesty. as david ritz says in his introduction, billie really did have "a life where music triumphed over pain."

  Billie Holiday continues to feed our spirit. She is our wounded angel whose voice will never fade.

if you decide to read lady sings the blues, i recommend snagging the 50th anniversary edition with introduction by ritz. he provides some helpful context to this book's origins. yes, it was ghostwritten by william dufty. but dufty conducted long conversational interviews with billie as a basis for the book, and her voice shines through. the words on the page are hers.

and yes, there are embellishments and untruths here. but the spirit of the book is candid. it is billie's life as it felt to her, and that is valuable.

billie's vivid jazz-era language and blunt attitude are spirited and wonderful (one of my favorite things is when she refers to her younger self as a "hip kitty"). they make me want to sit across a kitchen table from her while she talks about her life. to listen to her and be in her presence.

(i recommend putting on some of billie's albums in the background while you read. there's an intense combination here: her haunting voice in your ears and her brutally honest voice on the page)

one tricky thing to grapple with is billie's sexuality. i've read proclamations that she was "openly bisexual," but there is none of that here. and it certainly makes sense that in the 1950s the publisher would not allow the book to include wlw relationships. but billie mentions several (!!!) incidents where a "dike" hits on her, and she uses violence to reject the advances. in regard to one lesbian, she says "freakish feelings are better than no feelings at all." all of this makes me question how "openly" bisexual billie really was. it's difficult stuff, but the use of homophobic slurs is definitely of its time.

there's a whole lot of name-dropping in the second half of the book, which can become tiresome. billie does this in a silly way too. on more than one occasion she tells a story about an encounter with someone, and only at the end of the anecdote does she reveal which celebrity she was talking about. it's corny as hell, but maybe a bit endearing, too.

there are humorous anecdotes, but there's a lot of grit and substance here. billie speaks frankly about her battle with addiction, the many forms of abuse and racism she endured, and flaws in the US criminal justice system. needless to say, all of these struggles remain quite relevant today.

even with her many different traumas, the most heartbreaking part of the book for me is when she talks about her dreams for the future.

  Look at my big dream! It's always been to have a big place of my own out in the country someplace where I could take care of stray dogs and orphan kids, kids that didn't ask to be born; kids that didn't ask to be black, blue, or green or something in between. I'd only want to be sure of one thing - that nobody in the world wanted these kids. Then I would take them.

she wanted to give a better life to those with painful childhoods like her own. her empathy is palpable. she spends several pages describing her dream of this home for kids, as well as her dream of owning her own jazz club.

but billie died at age 44, three years after the publication of lady sings the blues.

her life was filled with tragedy, but it was also filled with love and music and deep emotion. reading this book while listening to billie's music made me feel close to her, which was a beautiful experience.

I've been told that nobody sings the word "hunger" like I do. Or the word "love." Maybe I remember what those words are all about. Maybe I'm proud enough to want to remember...