Rating: 4/5

I've never done a review on The Dark Tower books before, but this will be my fifth time reading the series and I'm going to take my time and give each book the review I think it deserves.

The Gunslinger, the first book in the series is a delightful read which reminds me of The Hobbit; in terms of simplicity and comfort.

A lot of people dislike the first book, but me personally - I love it. Like I said, it's simple and I consider it one of my comfort reads.

It's split into sections, which I'll lay out below.

"The Man in Black Fled Across The Desert, And The Gunslinger Followed."

The first line of the book just sets the tone, beautifully and throws you into a barren desert - trying to catch up with the illusive Man in Black.

Roland, the protagonist of the story is the last Gunslinger who is in search of the Tower but first he needs to catch the Man in Black to get information on how to get there.

On his way through the desert, he comes a town called Tull and things get a little crazy; I won't go into detail of course because I don't want to spoil it for anyone who's never read it.

He also comes across a man called Brown and his talking raven Zoltan. 

"Screw you and the horse you rode in on."

Then he reaches The Way Station, which is where he'll meet an important character. 

The Oracle And The Mountains, where he'll take mescaline and try get some answers from the Oracle/Succabus.

The Slow Mutants, which are like human 'muties' (basically humans who've been exposed to radiation and have evolved into almost amphibian type creatures who live in the dark and eat whatever they can find.

Then the last part - 

The Gunslinger And The Man In Black 

Here he catches up with Him and gets some answers and more..

Go read it and find out, I can almost guarantee you'll want to get straight onto that second book.

This is such an atmospheric read, the descriptions of the surroundings just puts you right there with Roland and the characters are unbeatable.

Straight onto The Drawing of the Three, because it's impossible to not continue. 😁