Rating: 1/5

This is the first (or second; or third… depends on the edition) volume of Nova trilogy, written by the beat generation icon, William S. Burroughs. I initially planned to read the whole trilogy, because (formally last volume) Nova Express, was nominated for Nebula in 1965. It doesn’t worth the effort.

The author actively uses his ‘novel’ cut-up method of composition: take your text, scissors, and start rearranging parts until they lost coherence. This means the story has no plot, no characters, no sense, only raw feelings, reminiscent of fever dream. It may work once in a short story, but for a novel it is an overkill. Up to the middle of the book readers get just glimpses of action – gay sex, hangings, hanged man’s erection, dirt, some fantastical creatures – crabs, centipedes, rape of a paralyzed boy, smell of color and color of words ad nauseum. Only in the middle, there is a small coherent story of time travel to Maya, who ruled people via computer. It parodies action-adventures of ‘heroes in ancient evil lands’. Then once again you get just glimpses.

In the middle of this town was a construction of clay cubicles several stories high and I could see some kinda awful crabs were stirring around inside it but couldn’t get close because the area around the cubicle is covered with black bones and hot as a blasting ­furnace—They had this heat weapon you got it?—Like white-hot ants all over you—
Meanwhile I had been approached by the Green Boys have a whole whore house section built on catwalks over the mud flats entirely given over to hanging and all kinds death in orgasm young boys need it special—They were beautiful critters and swarmed all over me night and day smelling like a compost heap—But I wasn’t buying it sight unseen and when I proposed to watch a hanging they come on all indignant like insulted whores—So Iam rigged up a long distance periscope with obsidian mirrors moaning about the equipment the way he always does and we watched them hang this boy just down from the country—Well I saw that when his neck snapped and he shot his load instead of flowing into the Green Boy the way nature intended these hot crabs hatched out of his spine and scoffed the lot.

Recently I've learnt how to make word clouds and they clearly show what this book is about:

This is two-word cloud

This is one-word cloud