Rating: 5/5

Like most people, the reason I read this book is that I LOVED the Godfather. I happened to love this book too, but expecting it to be like the Godfather was a HUGE mistake. 

Puzo is great I writing about crime, manipulation, betrayal, negotiations, murder, etc. But I don't think he ever really wanted to be this kind of author. Puzo never actually wanted to write an entire book about mafia. He'd written a good book with a a small part about mafia, and his publisher told him the novel would have been more successful if there had been more mafia. So he wrote the Godfather, and people loved it. However most people did because of the crime part, and Puzo ended up being a crime novelist. 

I read Puzo's last book, Omerta, and it was only about mafia and police, but it had no heart in it. It didn't feel like Puzo had cared about this novel. It felt like he had to write another book, that people would enjoy. 

Now how does that have anything to do with the Dark Arena? Well, this book wasn't written by the Puzo people loved because of his gift for writing about mafia. This book was written by the romantic Puzo who loved Dostoyevsky's novels and wanted to write about character who were emotionally suffering. 

Many people didn't like the book because they found the characters unrelatable and unlikeable. 

In my opinion, this book's greatest strength was its characters. They felt real. I think the problem is that they felt too real, and there was nothing epic or mythical about them. 

Now were they likeable? I think Hella (the German girlfriend) was likeable. And Mosca's family too. But the others weren't. And I think it was done on purpose. Like in the Catcher in the Rye, the only really likeable characters are Holden in his sisters. And that is because Holden thinks of most people as phonies. Well, in the Dark Arena, although it is 3rd person multiple points of view novel, the story is mostly seen through Mosca's eyes. And Mosca sees only the worst in people. He is unable to actually care about someone or something (the first thing he thought about his son is what an ugly baby he was, the second was how he wasn't that ugly anymore), and I think this is the most interesting thing about this novel. The extreme cynicism of the main character, his being unable to care about anything, his wanting to escape life and the world (kinda like Holden, although this book's got nothing to do with the Catcher in the Rye). 

(SPOILER ALERT.) The end is really tragic. The reader realizes that he truly doesn't care about anything at all. He's too depressed to live, but doesn't care enough to actually commit suicide. (END OF SPOILER)

Another thing that made this book great is how violently the story is told. 

Anyway, don't read this story when you expect it to be physically violent. Because this is pure psychological violence. (Good thing I read the Catcher in the Rye right after that book. It kept me from falling off the cliff and into the ravine of cynicism as I often do.)

If you want to read this book, expect it to be the kind of story Dostoyevsky would've written if he'd lived in the 40's.