Rating: 5/5

Woman in Red on a Gray Background is an Elegy written by Miguel Delibes (1920-2010) to his deceased wife. Published in 1991, she had died seventeen years before at the relatively young age of 48. 

Delibes has donned the fictional personality of a painter to write what remains a highly and easily recognized autobiographical account. If he starts his Elegy admitting that alcohol is the obvious but unbeatable means to come out of oneself, the thin fictional veil to which he resorts must have also been required to write about something that lay so painfully and dearly deep in him: the death of his lifelong love and muse.

His writing is however addressed to his daughter, who, for political reasons, is in prison together with her husband. These are the complex and black and white times under the Dictatorship of Francisco Franco. This is the grey background of her portrait.

Delibes was from Valladolid, the city held as the main trunk of the Spanish language in its purest form. A couple of years after the Civil War broke out he joined the Navy on the side of the Rebels (Franco’s side). He was eighteen. Later on he took a Law degree and became a journalist. At the age of twenty-six he married Angeles de Castro (fictionalized as Ana). During the fifties Delibes started to have problems with the Censors under the Dictatorship for the way he accounted the War. During the sixties both the country and the life of the writer began to enlighten somewhat, and he traveled abroad and received greater literary recognition. In 1973 he entered the Royal Academy of Language under the protection of Dámaso Alonso, its President and a writer from the Literary 1927 Generation Group (
  Generación del 27
). Delibes’s aversion to the political regime is felt continuously as he fears torture being inflicted to her daughter and son-in-law but only becomes explicit when he records the general hope that “that man” would die soon.

The writing weaves together very closely three main threads: the loving observations of the woman in the red dress with the political situation that kept their daughter behind bars, as well as the nature of creativity in an artist. 
 
The pieces in the three threads are dropped gradually and the full picture emerges as the brushstrokes are laid on the canvas. First of all we get to know Ana, his wife. She comes across as a joyous and delicate woman who knows her mind, retains her original way of looking at things and has a refined intuition that she shows mostly in the warm way with which she deals with others. She knows her bearings and does not let herself be perturbed by unimportant things. So, when she begins to notice how her arm swells and that she sometimes loses her balance or sensitivity in one of her cheeks, she calmly begins to dread that something is looming. As the symptoms become steadily and horribly more clear and the brain tumor is finally diagnosed, she keeps her optimism and her “déjate vivir” (or “let your self be lived”) well alive.

Meanwhile her daughter is in prison. She and her husband were locked up for their association to the Proceso 1001, as the detentions and trial of the leaders of the then illegal Workers Union respectively in 1972 and 1973 were known. Eventually they were let go.

But those were the years in which another death was expected by many, a liberating death, and the husband finds himself in the macabre situation of having to wonder and witness who would die first. Unfortunately, she did. Both deaths would give birth to unknown existences: a country which could start viciously fighting and killing itself again, and a personal and sterile emptiness. 
 
And it is his being faced with the gray prison walls, with the aseptic hospital walls, and with the white blank canvas that makes the painter realize that it was her joy and luminosity that was acting as his muse and that he was just a medium for her. He falls into serious doubts about the possibility that the sources of creativity could encounter also their own end.

For not even the painted portrait of her, wearing the vivid crimson on the ash background was his own work but that of another painter, a friend of theirs. Instead, what emerges is the literary portrait, not by the fictitious painter, but by the writer Miguel Delibes.

And in this portrait she retains her radiance and her still youthful image as she was to live from her death on, in the mind of her life- companion, the artist, and in his book for us to meet her. And Delibes achieves the clarity of his depiction with the austere and stern writing that we can expect to come out of the Meseta or the Castilian plateau: short sentences, direct style, and sparsity of adjectives. 
 
Red over gray. That simple.