Rating: 5/5

“The Dark Tower I: The Gunslinger” by Stephen King has been a reading adventure I’ve wanted to conquer for years. I’ve heard nothing but great things about this book series, with many Constant Readers calling it King’s magnum opus. It’s taken me a bit longer than usual to begin The Dark Tower series finally, but I’m here now and ready to take this journey head-on.

Before I begin my review of the first entry of The Dark Tower series, I decided to read this in a specific order after doing a ton of research. Of course, readers can read this in several ways, including solely The Dark Tower books, but if you want the definitive reading experience, here is my recommendation. I finalized this list with the help of several longtime Constant Readers, librarians, and countless others who have survived the journey to The Dark Tower…

The Stand
The Eyes of the Dragon
Insomnia
Hearts in Atlantis
‘Salem’s Lot
The Talisman
Black House
Everything's Eventual (The Little Sisters of Eluria)
The Dark Tower I: The Gunslinger
The Dark Tower II: The Drawing of the Three
The Dark Tower III: The Waste Lands
Charlie the Choo-Choo
The Dark Tower IV: Wizard and Glass
The Dark Tower: The Wind Through the Keyhole
The Dark Tower V: Wolves of the Calla
The Dark Tower VI: Song of Susannah
The Dark Tower VII: The Dark Tower

Also, here are the trigger warnings I found while reading “The Dark Tower I: The Gunslinger” so everyone is aware…

- Violence against women
- Violence against children
- Rape
- Drugs

If any of these trigger you, please do not read this novel. Moving along, I loved how King explained his thought process in this edition, including how he created The Dark Tower series and what influenced him. This was great to read before the novel since he digs deep and even breaks down why he revised it so everything falls into place with the rest of the series and makes sense in the grand scheme of things. Once I finished that intro, I was hit with one of the greatest lines of any horror book I’ve ever read…

“The man in black fled across the desert, and the gunslinger followed.”

After reading seven books and a short story referencing the man in black, this gave me goosebumps and sent shivers down my spine. It hit me hard since I knew I would be in for a wild ride. Sure enough, King delivered and then some.

Out of all the great characters in this novel, the gunslinger is my favorite. He's a fantastic character, from his actions to his epic quotes to how he fights his enemies. He seems to have been taken straight out of a horror western movie with dark fantasy attributes. 

The chase between the gunslinger and the man in black, especially all the tension and suspense throughout the encounters, was so much fun to read. It added such a dimension to both characters with a cat-and-mouse hunt taken to excitingly new levels since you just never knew what was real and what wasn’t.

Don’t worry. I will never spoil anything for readers, but there is an epic fight scene that completely blew me away. That was incredible and further proved how legendary the gunslinger is. I can’t wait to continue reading this series, thanks to everything that makes him tick.

I also loved how King weaved the past and present with the gunslinger and his past with Cuthbert. I enjoyed the backstory, which added more context as to why he is the way he is. It was just brilliantly written and has me genuinely excited for what awaits. The ending was wild and left me wanting more. I know I have a ton of reading ahead of me, but if this is any indication, I can see why Constant Readers hold The Dark Tower series in high regard. 

I give “The Dark Tower I: The Gunslinger” by Stephen King a 5/5 for being one hell of an entry to what many consider one of the greatest book series ever written. This was jam-packed with everything I look for in a novel and then some. It is a solid horror novel with epic fights, memorable characters, an incredible protagonist, and an antagonist I despise. I can’t wait to see him get what he finally deserves. I regret not reading The Dark Tower series sooner, but that’s okay; I’m here now and anxious for more.

Now, if you’ll excuse me, I finally met The Gunslinger, and it’s time to see what a Drawing of the Three looks like.