Rating: 5/5

THE AUTHOR OF ‘THE CELESTINE PROPHECY’ TURNS TO NONFICTION

Author James Redfield wrote in the Preface to this 1997 book, “It does not take the mystery of a new millennium to convince us that something is shifting in human consciousness… Most important, we can sense something changing in the quality of our own experience. Our focus seems to be shifting away from abstract arguments about spiritual theory or dogma and reaching out for something deeper: the real perception of the spiritual as it occurs in daily life… Both of my novels are what I call adventure parables. They were my way of illustrating what I believe is a new spiritual awareness sweeping humanity… I’ve chosen a nonfiction format for this book because I think, as human beings, we are in a very special place in relationship to this growing awareness… In this book we will see that this old mechanistic worldview has been discredited since the early decades of the twentieth century… But the prejudices of the mechanistic worldview linger in our consciousness, guarded by an extreme skepticism that serves to screen out the more subtle spiritual perceptions that would challenge its assumptions.” (Pg. xvi-xx)

He continues, “The social change we are talking about is not a revolution, where the structures of society are torn down and rebuilt as one ideology overcomes another. What is occurring now is an internal shift in which the individual changes first, and the institutions of human culture more or less look the same but are rejuvenated and transformed IN PLACE, because of a new outlook by those who maintain them… My observation … is that this transformation in awareness is sweeping across human culture through a kind of positive social contagion. Once enough people begin to live this awareness in an open way, discussing it freely, then others see this modeled awareness and immediately realize that it allows them to live outwardly more of what they already intuitively know inside.” (Pg. xxi-xxiii)

He recounts, “The actual writing of ‘The Celestial Prophecy occurred from January 1989 through April 1991… The signal that the book was near completion came when many of these people began to ask for copies of the manuscript for friends. My first search for a publisher met with no success… I was interpreting the complete lack of publishing opportunities as a failure, a negative event, and that was the interpretation that had stopped the coincidences that I felt had been leading me forward. When I realized what was happening, I … made more revisions in the book, emphasizing this point… Within days, a friend mentioned that she had met an individual who … had worked in publishing for many years… [He] wanted to work with individuals who were planning to self-publish… and since my manuscript was getting a high number of world-of-mouth referrals, he felt this approach could be successful… In six months, the book had over 100,000 copies in print… It sold so many copies … because others also began to give it away to their friends everywhere.” (Pg. 8-10)

He suggests, “Perhaps the biggest challenges to those of us beginning to live the new spiritual awareness is relating to skeptics… The skeptics we run into seem to fall into two broad categories. The largest group is those who take a skeptical position not because they have thoroughly investigated the wide rant of mystical encounters they are hearing about, but because they haven’t… Usually, these skeptics live and work among lots of doubters… The other type of skeptic … is the true adherent to scientific materialism. This is a person who might research to some extent the arena of mystical experience but who always falls back to the barricades of materialism, demanding objective proof of such claims… In dealing with skeptics… we must remember that a degree of skepticism is, in fact, important. All of us must avoid taking a faddish idea at face value and must look at any assertion about the nature of reality with a critical eye. Yet we must not forget that … [we should] stay open-minded enough to consider the phenomenon in question. Maintaining this balance between skepticism and openness is especially difficult when the phenomenon involves our inner psychology or spirituality.” (Pg. 28-30)

He states, “We can see… that science has not completely failed us. There has always been an underlying current in science that was silently moving past the material obsession. Beginning in the first decades of the twentieth century, a new wave of thinking began to fashion a more complete description of the universe and of ourselves---a description that is finally making its way into popular consciousness.” (Pg. 
44-45)

He explains, “physicist John Bell constructed his now famous law… which stipulates that once connected, atomic entities are always connected… What’s more, the latest superstring and hyperspace theories … see a universe that includes multidimensions, although incredibly small, and reduce both matter and energy to pure stringlike vibrations. As one might expect, this new description of the universe by the physicists has begun to affect the other disciplines as well… No longer can we think of ourselves as living in a simple world of solid, material stuff… everything around us is a mysterious vibrating pattern of energy, the stuff of light… and that includes us.” (Pg. 53, 55)

He continues, “researchers in psychology have begun to seriously study the effect of our intentions on the physical universal. Recent research… has shown that our connectedness and influence go much further than that. Our intentions can also affect other people’s bodies, their minds, and the shape of events in the world. The new physics has shown us that we are connected in a way that transcends the limits of space and time. Bell’s theorem seems to apply just as well to our thoughts a to the operation of elementary particles.” (Pg. 64-65)

He suggests, “I believe that we have finally reached a point where the idea of a personal transcendent experience---variously called enlightenment, nirvana, satori, transcendence, and cosmic consciousness---has reached a significant level of acceptance; it has become an integral part of out new spiritual awareness. We have, as a culture, begun to accept mystical encounters as something real and available to all human beings.” (Pg. 87-88)
\
He summarizes, “We began with the reality of coincidences… [which] seem to be pulling us toward some special destiny. The second step was to overcome the inertia of the old worldview by understanding the psychology of why we denied the mysteries of existence for so long… We integrate the third step when we truly begin to grasp, every day, that we live in a mysterious, energy-dynamic universe that responds to our intentions and assumptions. This sets the stage for the fourth step, which is to learn to negotiate the spiritual world… discovering for ourselves the transcendent experience described by mystics of all ages, which is the fifth step. This … gives us a glimpse of higher consciousness and opens an inner connection that we can remember and go back to… we can enter the sixth step and experience the spiritual catharsis of dropping out control drama and discovering who we really are… At this point, we can live with a fuller awareness within which we are ever more alert to synchronicity and engage more fully in our destiny.” (Pg. 123-124)

He asserts, “the scope of the new interpersonal ethic is very large. Once we reach the level of awareness in which we know that most of our synchronicity arrives through other people, we begin to use the energy dynamics we’ve learned to uplift all the people in our lives.” (Pg. 171)

He concludes, “Our overriding purpose has been to raise our energy level to the point where we can walk into the Afterlife dimension, essentially merging the two dimensions into one… The power of faith is real. Every thought is a prayer, and if the vision of the new spiritual awareness resides in the back of our minds every day, very minute, as we interact in the world, the magic of synchronicity will accelerate for everyone, and the destiny we intuit in our hearts will become a reality.” (Pg. 232-234)

This book will be of keen interest for those studying ‘New Age’ ideas.