Rating: 5/5

5 "wicked, lighthearted, intriguing" stars !!

 2016 Honorable Mention Read with High Distinction

Hats off to you Ms. Merkle Riley!!!!

You have written one of the most delicious historical fictions that I have ever read.

This book is loosely based on the Affair of the Poisons in 17th century Paris and Versailles.
You can read about it briefly here:
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affair_...

She has created a fictional character on the periphery of these events in order to tell an alternate story that weaves in an out of the Affair of the Poisons. This main character is Genevieve Pasquier a bourgouisie maiden that due to family cruelties and misfortunes re-invents herself as a sorceress and fortune teller to the nobility and even to the King and Queen of France. This maiden is deeply intelligent, intuitive and battles her morality and carnal desires throughout the book.

The book has a complex plot, a fascinating assortment of characters, lighthearted perspectives on disturbing issues and is deeply poetic and romantic. I wanted this book to go on forever and was reading slower and slower but darnit it did come to an end.

Here is a sample from Genevieve's adolescent diary musings:

"March 5, 1675. Why do persist in dealing with the Devil? If there is no God, then there is no Devil, either, and all is waste and foolishness. If there is a God, why would anyone of good sense want to deal with such a second-rate being as the Devil? It not only defies logic, it is in bad taste.

The rest of the page I filled with drawings of Lamotte's face" 

 Lamotte is who this young woman lusts for. Brilliant, hilarious and true to life to an adolescent woman.

Lamotte (when he becomes her lover) says "...If I had the pen of Moliere, I could make him comic. That is the role of art, is it not? To make monsters comic, so we can bear them, and our own cheap griefs into grand tragedy so that others will weep with us."

This is exactly what Ms. Merkle Riley has done with this smashing, brilliant and intelligent piece of historical fiction!!

Do yourself a favor and read it :)