Rating: 2/5

A while back I saw a list of "10 classic Westerns you should read" (or some similar listicle). I'm not a Western reader but I (sometimes) try to broaden my horizons and try out styles &amp; genres I don't usually read. So I made a note of some of the titles on the list and eventually got around to reading Zane Grey's *Buffalo Stampede*.

I have to say that this didn't make a favorable impression. This isn't bad exactly but it is pretty boring, with flat characters, little dramatic tension for much of the book, a trite romance, and little of the lyrical prose with paens to open west and the majestic buffalo that I had been expecting.

The main character is a farmer who -- shock! -- turns out to the best skinner, the best drover, and have the second best horse. (The best horse belongs to the plainsman with decades of experience, guess it would have been too unbelievable for him to have the best horse as well.) He's also brave, trustworthy, etc, etc. He's basically a "Mary Sue" (aka "Gary Stu"). And he immediately falls in with a group of buffalo hunters who are all top blokes as well.

And yet....nothing really happens for the first 180 pages. It isn't until the closing words of chapter ten, "This Wild West was beginning to show its teeth", that any kind of real dramatic tension exists. The lack of tension could have been excused if there was beautiful prose about the vistas, the gruesomeness of skinning buffalos for a dozen hours a day, the sheer bone breaking exhaustion of the work...but it all comes across a bit flat. Other than a few sentences about how hard the work is, the characters don't *feel* like they are exhausted from weeks of this.

There is an obligatory romance that is as trite and cliched as any Hollywood movie. The characters meet twice and exchange maybe 3 sentences or so. And then at their next meeting they are proposing marriage. It just doesn't have any weight; it feels perfunctory -- "must have romance". There's certainly nothing in either character that would seem to make someone fall in love with them. They are young and handsome/pretty but that's it.

But really at the end of the day, the weak romance is a minor complaint next to just how boring the whole storyline is.