Rating: 5/5

I read and reread Not Without My Daughter as a teen, growing more horrified and even more thankful to have been born in a nation where I had clean food and where, even as a child, I was free to go about when, where, and how I pleased.

		I’ll begin by stating for the record that watching the movie is insufficient for getting a clear picture of what life was like for Betty Mahmoody and her child during their 18-month imprisonment in Iran. Sally Fields’s and Alfred Molina’s brilliant portrayals notwithstanding, as is often the case, the film adaptation of this story is an abridged and sanitized account, a faded husk of the tale you will encounter in the pages of this book.

	Mahmoody and her coauthor do an excellent job of chronicling the systematic dismantling of what, for quite some time, had been an idyllic and prosperous life, from her husband’s slow descent into fanaticism and sociopolitical turmoil, to his increasing and protracted periods of “lethargy,” (MahMoody) to his occasional, but telling, spirts of anger over his daughters being permitted to consume frivolous and/ or “Western” programs and ideals. Mahtob Mahmoody, in her own story, recalls having been grabbed and spanked by her father at the age of 3 or four for the heinous act of watching The Smurfs with her big brother.

	This and other such warning signs were present but, as Mahmoody takes care to explain, easily dismissed because she lived ensconced in the certainty that her Iranian husband had been “Americanized” (Mahmoody). I find this term to be quite problematic, but I won’t go into why here and now.

	Mahmoodi’s account raises some interesting questions, the first of which is, does she perpetuate harmful notions about and images of Islamic faith and culture? Is there anything intolerant and/or mean-spirited in the vivid descriptions of filth (bugs in the food, the airport bathroom, the pervasive aroma of Teheran) that could have been cut out of the manuscript? Did Mahmoody have a responsibility to Mahtob to keep silent about what her father did? Was her decision to go public with what happened motivated by money and fame? Was she being disingenuous regarding the circumstances surrounding her departure from the United States and about the length of her stay in Iran? Was she careless in divulging the details of her escape? 

	My other, more urgent questions are, does Mahmoody even have the responsibility to avoid perpetuating such notions and images, most especially if, in her case, they happen to be the truth? Might becoming a public figure and an emblem for social and legal justice have been a protective measure? After all, by all accounts, Said Mahmoody was clear, on multiple occasions, that he would find and kill her when or if she tried to escape, but not before he ensured that his daughter would be raised in a misogynistic war zone wherein she would be subject to abuse and compelled to renounce her faith, her way of life, and her place of birth.
 To continue, is it fair of anyone to dismiss her story on the grounds that it casts Islamic culture in a negative light?

	Mahtob answers most of these questions in her book, but the rest are one’s people will have to puzzle out for themselves.