Rating: 4/5

"I take pride withal in my humiliation, and as I am to this privilege condemned, almost I find joy in an abhorrent salvation; I am, I believe, alone of all our race, the only man in human memory to have been shipwrecked and cast up upon a deserted ship."

The story is told from the perspective of a modern editor who has sorted through the discarded papers of the novel's main character, Roberto della Griva, a 17th-century Italian nobleman, who is the sole survivor of a shipwreck that finds himself cast up on a deserted ship anchored off a mysterious Pacific island. The story jumps back and forth between Roberto's youth in Italy, his participation in the siege of the fortress of Casale Monferrato (this 1628-1630 conflict is related to the Thirty Years' War) and France; and his arrival on the deserted ship, Daphne. But, what a wonderful deserted ship this is! It's has a mini-Garden of Eden with exotic flora and fauna stashed in the hold. And dozens of scientific instruments and gadgets. There is also preserved food and water. And some Intruder may or may not be feeding the animals... It's all very mysterious. Roberto is stranded and has no way to reach the island because he can't swim. In between Roberto's writings of his predicament are his love letters to a woman, intellectual ponderings, fevered dreams, and tales of a dishonourable half-brother who may or may not be a figment of Roberto's imagination. 

I love Eco's evocative descriptions, especially those dealing with the coral reef and the ship. The writing style is elegant but elaborate, making use of uncommon words, which I liked a great deal. My favourite character is the excitable Jesuit priest Father Caspar, who kept mangling his German/English (in this translation). There are many side tangents dealing with Baroque-era science, metaphysics, philosophy, cosmology and the all important search for the secret of determining longitude. Usually philosophical and metaphysical waffling annoy me, but this somehow fits into the time and place (even if half of went right over my head). There was less religious theological and historical background in this novel than in 'The Name of the Rose', and more about determining longitude, which appealed to me. This isn't just a simple story either. Eco interweaves language, symbols, references to literature, myths, and historical references. So, a second and even third re-read would provide additional meanings and new things to find within this text. Still, a lot of waffling. But, still, somehow compelling.