Rating: 5/5

Some books are worth waiting years for to read  and I have certainly waited a very long time to read this one. 

I have to confess I am not a Stephan King fan as Horror or science fiction just doesnt work for me but having watched the Green Mile Movie some years ago I have always wanted to read the book and when I happened to find a copy among a pile of books lately I just knew there was no time like the present.  

My only problem with reading a book after watching such an iconic movie is that I am unable to imagine the characters for myself, but setting that aside.......What a phenomenal read this was Now I am actually jealous of readers who haven't read the book yet because this one is such a beautiful, compelling and brilliant story, I was blown away by the read. 

The Green Mile is a unique tale of Paul Edgcombe, a prision guard in charge of death town in Cold Mountain Penitentiary. Convicted Killers all await their turn to walk the Green Mile and their date with the Electric Chair. When John Coffey is condemned for a terrifying and horrendous crime, Paul Edgecombe is confronted with the terrible wondrous truth that will change his life forever.

I went though all sorts of emotions when reading this story. The writing is vivid and the story believable and you feel and experience everything this tale has to offer. There were actually times I felt the humid heat so well described in the book. The characters are so realistic and believable, and the plot twists and turns kept me turning the pages. A little sprinkle (just a little) of magical happenings make this novel the perfect story that I will remember a long time from now. John Coffey’s character made me well up on so many occasions and yet there is a lovely sense of hope in the novel that keeps the book from becoming depressing. 

I only have a tiny paperback copy of this book which I really have to replace with a hard copy for my real life bookshelf. 

 If you have this on your TBR Shelf ...........Do yourself a favor this summer and bump it right up to the top of the pile as this is a book you won’t regret reading and only after you have finished then watch the movie.