Rating: 5/5

How are dictators being made? Mein Kampf, Pol Pot: Anatomy of a Nightmare, The Last King of Scotland and Sandstorm: Libya in the Time of Revolution, won't answer this question perfectly. William Golding has the perfect answer to it through this allegory. 

How can a novel about a bunch of stranded school kids teach us about dictators?

This is not just a novel about school boys. This is a novel about the intricate ways the human psyche performs when it is stretched to the paramount in abominable circumstances when liberty is abundant, and everyone is equal, without any prerogatives.

This parable hits the right chord to enlighten us regarding our leniency to entropy. This is exactly how dictators are made. The boys teach us a lot of lessons through the way they behave and the areas they remain silent.

  

  What I learned from this book 

  1) Who is the beast in the Lord of the flies? 

There is a chance that some people will try to read this novel superficially without thinking about its deeper meaning. It is the concept of the beast discussed by the author that they will ultimately get stuck after being confused. We can interpret the beast in many ways depending on our conscience. 

The simplest explanation of the beast is that it is the basic instinct of savagery existing in the minds of human beings.  You can interpret it in many complicated ways based on your thinking level.
 “Maybe there is a beast… maybe it's only us.” 
 

  2) Are human beings behaving in a civilized manner just because of the laws that he has to follow? 

This is a tricky question to answer. But it becomes an easy question if you have read this book and contemplated it for some time.
 “Which is better--to have laws and agree, or to hunt and kill?” 

"The rules!" shouted Ralph, "you're breaking the rules!"
"Who cares?"  

  3) What is the easiest way to know about the personality of a person? 

Golding metaphorically tells us the easiest way to understand the personality of a person. 

It is said that personality is who we are and what we do when everybody is watching and character is what we are and what we do when nobody is watching.

The way a person talks to older people, his subordinates, and disabled people tells us a lot about their character. These are the groups of people who cannot stand up as equals for their rights.

We know that adversity builds and reveals character. We can see the author's brilliance by the way how he culminated all the above-mentioned ideas and brilliantly revealed them to us through the behavior of a few stranded children.
 "He wanted to explain how people were never quite what you thought they were."  

  My favourite three lines from this book 

 “The greatest ideas are the simplest.” 

 “What are we? Humans? Or animals? Or savages?"  

  "I believe man suffers from an appalling ignorance of his own nature. I produce my own view in the belief that it may be something like the truth."  
 

  What could have been better?

Some people may say this novel has extreme racist remarks and body shaming. There is also some content that some readers might find explicit. 

This novel was published on 17 September 1954. It would be best if you kept this in the back of your mind while reading it. It is because some people are viewing this book through the current lens of political correctness they find it disturbing. That is one of the greatest injustices we can do to any literary creation.

  Rating 

 5/5 This novel is one among those few masterpieces that can be read in many ways depending on the reader's proclivity.

—————————————————————————

  You can also follow me on 
 
 Instagram ID - Dasfill  |  YouTube Channel ID - Dasfill  |  YouTube Health Channel ID - Dasfill - Health  |  YouTube Malayalam Channel ID - Dasfill - Malayalam   |  Threads ID - Dasfill  |  X ID - Dasfill1  |  Snapchat ID - Dasfill  |  Facebook ID - Dasfill  |  TikTok ID - Dasfill1