Rating: 3/5

welcome to THE OCTOBERDYSSEY, this month's installment of my project long classics dedicated to getting me to read long and intimidating old books.

this one is a little different, since it's technically a revisit.

i read this in school but i don't remember anything about it except the words "wine-dark sea" and that i hated it.

that's a good enough reason to reread.

BOOK I
odysseus is being "kept" by a "goddess" and meanwhile his wife penelope is stuck home with their adult son doing all she can to fend off the one million guys who are interested. i hope she's at least having some fun on the side.

BOOK II
allegedly penelope is not having fun, but she is at least doing tricks and pranks. which is my idea of a good time.

BOOK III
we're getting a quick trojan war recap for those of us who didn't join homer for the last episode. or me for the apriliad.

BOOK IV
telemachus continues his road trip to see the stars of the iliad. the suitors are chasing him in order to commit murder (?) but this is not that concerning because he has the godly grace and protection of a mommy's boy. making friends and influencing gods.

BOOK V
if a goddess was holding me hostage and was like "okay fine, you can leave. just build a boat" i would head right back to her house because i am not getting anywhere. i don't respect odysseus for much at this point (cheater!!!) but i have to hand it to him on that.

BOOK VI
odysseus landed on phaeacia and immediately took a nice bath and had a snack. elite combo after a big travel day.

BOOK VII
athena being like "this king and queen share distant ancestry. he's her uncle." oh!

BOOK VIII
damn, the incest royals are nice. now odysseus has a big ship and 50 guys and 22 barnyard animals and the memory of doing really well at a mini-olympics in his honor and some lengthy song synopses to head home with.

BOOK IX
quick pause for odysseus backstory, cyclops edition. 

BOOK X
now we've reached the circe part, including odysseus telling her "i will NEVER come to your bed!...only because i'm scared you'll hurt me. if you promise you won't i'm in." oh i'd kill him if i were penelope.

BOOK XI
we're going straight to hell! mostly to run errands and do some people watching.

BOOK XII
dawn is getting namedropped within an inch of her life in this book.

BOOK XIII
odysseus wrapped up his story, accepted his gifts, and told the incest royals "thanks guys! heading home, hopefully my wife has never made a single mistake!" now he won't even head back to the house without testing penelope's sorry self. the audacity of this guy.

BOOK XIV
now he's telling more lies to test the loyalty of his pig farming slave. good lord.

BOOK XV
athena went to pick up telemachus from his friend's house since his dad is home from a work trip. many such cases. 

BOOK XVI
athena told odysseus to reveal his true identity to telemachus, but for some reason she gave him a makeover first so his reaction was mostly "you can't be my dad. you're too hot."

BOOK XVII
so it turns out the suitors not only eat like 14 farm animals a day — they're also teeming with a barely contained violence.

BOOK XVIII
weird one. odysseus broke a beggar's jaw and athena yassified penelope so she could go parent telemachus and extort gifts from the suitors and odysseus told the slave girls telemachus was going to cut them into little pieces and the guys called him a bald hobo and threw things at him but his coward ass ducked behind yet another slave and they got him instead.

BOOK XIX
telemachus and odysseus made a quick plan to kill everybody, and then he was like "okay, get out of here. i'm going to aggravate your mom and make her cry." oh boy did he ever!

BOOK XX
odysseus has now been home without revealing himself or doing much of anything besides elaborate loyalty tests for 25% of the book.

BOOK XXI
penelope said she'd marry whoever can bend odysseus' bow. you'll never guess who won.

BOOK XXII
yeah, so. that bow thing was just kind of a dramatic entrance into what i can only call a suitor massacre.

BOOK XXIII
penelope and odysseus just caught up for a while. she's better than me because as soon as i heard the names calypso and circe i'd have a few questions.

BOOK XXIV
odysseus and his dad have a viral youtube military visit video-style reunion and they all lived happily ever after!

OVERALL
i don't hate this book like i did at 15 years old, but i definitely don't love it. iliad supremacy and justice for my girl penelope.
rating: 3.5