Rating: 4/5

I've enjoyed Colleen McCullough's "Masters of Rome" series. I was rather surprised to see she had written a historical fiction about the Trojan War. "The Song of Troy" is an attempt to take the epic events of the Illiad and tell the story in a more realistic way- this is the story of Troy without the gods and myths common to the Illiad. I am not saying this is a bunch of atheists, but their "gods" are no more real, nor do they appear, any more than the Christian God appeared to Crusaders.

This story revolves really around two people. One is Odysseus and he is a clever, cunning, if not brilliant man. Then there is Priam, who is the polar opposite. In fact, the fall of Troy can be laid squarely at the feet of Priam.

The conflict starts due to the Greek states being cut off from trade with the Trojans. This is due to Priam's greed and his duplicity when dealing with Herakles. This sets off a chain of events that ends with Helen leaving with Paris. This is the excuse Agamemnon needs to start the war.

The events are the events from the Illiad, but told with less fantastical elements. While famous heroes do exist, they are nothing more than really gifted human beings. From Achilles to Ajax and Hector to Sarpedon, these are far more believable versions than the man-gods running around the Illiad.

Perhaps the best thing is that there are no real heroes here, save perhaps Hektor, and that like most real history the blame can be spread around. Helen is an awful person, Menelaus is strangely weak and even the great Achilles is shown as a supreme warrior but hardly a demigod.

But the true hero? Odysseus who uses intelligence and cunning to win the war. A very interesting book and one that I enjoyed. A retelling of the Illiad in a more "realistic" sense. The reasons behind the war and the way in which it was conducted makes much more sense than the Illiad's version. While not all purists will enjoy this, I think people who enjoyed the conflict more than the tale will appreciate this historical fiction around the Trojan War.