Rating: 5/5

There had never been a death so foretold. 

Márquez's oeuvre may be roughly divided into two streams of writing: the magician of One Hundred Years of Solitude and Love in the Time of Cholera and the journalist-adventurer of this novel and News of a Kidnapping. The ominous world of magic realism closes shop when Marquez switches his gears to journalistic storytelling. But may be not quite; because right from the opening scene an eerie premonition trails at the heels of Santiago Nasar and, do what he might, catches him unawares to punish him for a crime he might or might not have committed. In this novella the writer-narrator sets himself up to the task of investigating the events that led to the death so foretold.

You may call it a reportage of an impossible and inexplicable murder that could have been prevented with just a shout. You may call it story of a man who must pay for violating the unwritten code of honour when he is suspected of deflowering Angela Vicario, his best pal's sister, hours before she was to get married to another man. Or you may simply call it a story of an honour killing, but unlike other stories of this kind this is not yet another banal attempt aimed at soliciting public's disgust at the horrific practice, told from the moral high ground of an observer's point of view. It does not portray the entire value system backward and barbaric which stories of this kind are wont to do, but operates from inside the culture to report on the dynamics that lead to and make something like this possible. This objectivity sits at the heart of good writing and this sets Márquez apart from a bevy of writers who have produced stereotypical fictional accounts of a culture at war with itself.

I won't call it "unreliable narration" but rather a deliberate building up of ambiguity with respect to the victim's role: Was Santiago Nasar guilty of dishonouring Angela Vicario, or was there a big misunderstanding all along, made all the more complicated by a surfeit of circumstantial evidence? Here you have Márquez, the master investigative journalist, with the best implements of his trade, testing your powers of observation and turning you into a witness who is being strung along willy-nilly by a powerful voice. It's one of those novels where the process of telling a story is greater than the story itself. In other words, how it's told rather than what's told.

By the honour of Angela Vicario this is a story unequaled in its telling!