Rating: 4/5

rating: 4/5

A beautiful retelling of the Illiad. McCullough chooses to tell the tale through a variety of POVs (like Agamemnon, Hektor, Odysseus, Helen, Achilles, Paris, etc.) but it doesn't get confusing, whether it is my previous knowledge of the Illid or McCullough's writing style and strong characters filled with unique personalities (or a combination of both), I had no problem keeping track of the narrators. This style also enables us to see the conflict from all sides, to view all the characters as human with desires and flaws and heroism, which I think makes a grander tale. 

Of course, as with every story there are a few issues, like Helen's insta-love with Paris (of course McCullough can't be blamed). I had to explain it away that she was just a girl suffocating in her life and he offered to get her out, give her something more.

I adored the cunning Odysseus. His sharp mind combined with ambiguous morality and desire to do whatever needs to be done (even if it destroys others) to win was truly frightening. 

Her take on the Achilles/Patrokles/Braise triangle was interesting. And I even liked Braise, at first. Then not so much. She showed her true colors after Patrokles' death and it pissed me off (not the author or novel, but Braise... I guess strong feeling toward a character are a good thing?). She basically said that by Patrokles questioning Achilles, he was never truly a friend and that she's better because she never questioned Achilles' motivations. Blind devotion a virtue? No way.

"I know how much he meant to you, but you grieve too much."
"He died despising me. He threw our friendship away."
"Then he didn't really know you."
"I can't explain to you either."
"You don't need to. Whatever you do, Achilles, is right."

And then...

But to Patrokles the real betrayal was your love of me. It was necessary he find flaws... to feed his own sense of injury. Forget Patrokles. He was no true friend to you at the last.

The Bitch just told Achilles to forget his best friend and decade-long lover after his death. Oh, I stopped liking her quickly.

So I secretly cheered when Achilles slapped Brise for what she said about Patrokles. I had that "oh no you didn't, bitch" moment and was glad Achilles didn't just take it either.

The Achilles/Hektor fight was epic! As it should be. 
  One of us had to die in this duel, the other soon after, for so it had been decided when the strands of our destinies were interwoven.
 

This modern retelling of the classic shows just how universally a story like this can speak to its readers/listeners. For thousands of years, a variation of this has been re-told and re-written, been enjoyed. I would recommend this re-telling for anyone who may be intimidated by the Illiad and those who love the Illiad and want another interpretation of the classic story.