Rating: 3/5

I couldn't put down this book, but it was utterly, utterly depressing. I mentioned that to a friend, who glanced at it and said, "Uh, did you see the subtitle? What did you think it was going to be?" Touché. The few moments of respite from wanting to cry were when Mah put in Chinese history for context, which worked well, was helpful, and as I said, let me breathe for a moment before I inevitably wanted to go back in time and adopt this poor creature.

And that was the thing that got me - at least twice in this book, an adult outside of the family shows they are clearly aware of what's going on. The most shining example is when Niang's sister picks up Adeline from school and tells her, "Don't worry, I'll treat you all the same." So, how in the hell could they just hand her back over to her family? The husband worked for the UN, it's not as if they had to worry about insane repercussions, considering they could just point to the obvious abuses she had suffered and ruin the family's reputation. I digress.

I definitely became super frustrated with Mah by the end, because I could not for the life of me understand how, living on a separate continent for years and years, she still cared so much what these psychopaths thought of her. I related more (and wanted to know more about) Susan, who also rejected the will money. And I agree with other reviewers who thought the focus on that seemed odd, and came off as selfish. I don't think it's selfish, because hello, you were abused for years and your parents are loaded, certainly you're entitled to hope that at least when they kick it you'll get something out of it - but at the same time, I can't really relate to someone who would even want a cent of that kind of person's money, especially when they already made a great living completely on their own merit.

As a side note: While this certainly wasn't the most amazing book I've ever read, I'm a little concerned at some of the reviews that depict the author as whiny and spoiled for wanting tram fare to go the mile and a half to school . . . when she was six, and living in the middle of a metropolis. In addition, it's a bit of a reach to say she was whiny in general. If you think any type of behavior aside from psychopathy under the age of 13 (the age at which she's sent away to boarding school), especially when said child is earning straight A's and winning writing contests, earns a child the abuse she endured, you're absolutely nuts. I actually wonder if people are thinking she's older in parts of the book than she actually was.

And again - whiny because when her friends gave her a surprise party for winning class president, she got a bloody nose and all of her friends were sent home? She was TEN.

I don't think anyone can argue that this family is ridiculously dysfunctional, with Niang being the sort of psychopathic mastermind behind all of it. The siblings' behavior isn't "mean" in the typical sense, but they were trained to be manipulative, demeaning, and disgusting. Basically, a "Lord of the Flies" situation. Again, sort of scary people think that this is normal. My brother and I weren't friends growing up, but he never was cruel or . . pissed in my orange juice. THEY PISSED IN HER ORANGE JUICE. Ugh.