Rating: 3/5

A kaleidoscope of text. I picked this up in the depths of a reading slump, which is a decidedly horrible idea. There is no outward “sense” to be made from the writing of Burroughs, as the book is made using the cut-up writing technique (hence “The Cut-Up Trilogy”), which is the rearranging of portions of the text that have been cut up and given new form. Whatever comes about, comes about. There is more method to the madness than what I have just portrayed there, but it’s not a method which I can make much sense of.

I read the plot summary section of the Wikipedia article after finishing. There were references to time travel and the Mayans, which I remember, but the rest of that paragraph? I must have been out to lunch, boss. I didn’t pick up any of it. I will quote from the introduction of my copy of the restored text:

“In this uniquely queer textual zone styles and genres switch in mid-sentence and incompatible realities mix in a single phrase. “Rubbed Moscow up me with a corkscrew motion of his limestones?”? “orgasm crackled with electric afternoon”? “Zero eaten by crab”? Is this science fiction or avant garde poetry? Drug literature or homosexual pornography? Political satire? All, and yet none of the above, because no labels stick and it doesn’t matter how often you read the text, it will seem new every time. As Joan Didion said, to imagine you can put The Soft Machine down when the phone rings and find your place a few minutes later “is sheer bravura.”

Not knowing where we are or where we’re going is the disorientating and yet desired experience, so anyone looking for a guide to reading The Soft Machine had better follow the perverse example set by Burroughs himself back in 1953, when solicited by a smiling Colombian street boy: “He looked like the most inefficient guide in the Upper Amazon but I said, ‘Yes.’” An efficient guide would only have taken Burroughs where he already knew to go, so following his desire by falling for a hustler was the right choice for someone committed to the difficult path of discovering the unknown. You crazy or something read The Soft Machine alone? Yes, indeed; but that’s the best way to do it because what you find there will be your business. Since the text itself resists mapping, all this Introduction can promise, therefore, is a map of where we are right now, offering for the first time the material history of a book about which so much has remained untold–even the origins of its title, a suitably paradoxical phrase that begins with an utterly misleading definite article, since the book in your hand is not The but A Soft Machine.”

Weird experience, but enjoyable. I will continue with the trilogy. I know it won’t get any easier. We move.