Rating: 5/5

Set in 1923 in Soledad City, New Mexico, a newly minted state, A Covenant With Death is a courtroom drama that evolves into so much more. Ben Morales is a young, inexperienced district judge in this town where serious crime is rare, and the murder of Mrs. Louise Talbot is far from being an open and shut case. What he learns as this case develops, and what we learn along with him, is literary genius.

This is a book about justice, the difficult kind, the kind that calls into question the most basic tenets around which we operate and tests the foundation of the system it rests upon. Man is not clairvoyant and judges and juries are men, and therein lies the rub, as Hamlet might tell us. 

...and if justice was not rightness, how could it be justice? That was why you shot a crippled horse. That was also why you drank during Prohibition. Because sometimes justice and rightness did not seem to be the same. Justice was public and rightness was private and if they were not the same you chose rightness and did not inflict pain.

More than the details of the murder, the process of the trial, or the guilt or innocence of the accused, this is a story about the struggle of a good man to judge the life of another without prejudice or bias. It is about reaching deep and finding the best you can be among the foibles that make you a human being. It is about the choice every man who is challenged with injustice must make: whether to be part of the status quo or to risk stepping outside the boundaries that are comfortable to us all.

There must come to every man who is part of an apparatus a moment when the apparatus functions without him, in spite of him, unheeding; the moment when he must say, You take the king’s shilling, you fight the king’s war. Either that or he deserts. But the moment is a hard one. You join up because they need a man and you think you are a good one, and suddenly you are not a man at all but one small dumb erg in a monstrous blind force.

My friend Kirk told me long ago that this was a book I should read. I put it on my TBR and bought it for my Kindle. I sometimes wonder how it is I let gems gather dust so often, but I shall not worry over that now but celebrate that I have finally dusted it off. I wish Kirk were here…I’d like to say “thank you.”