Rating: 2/5

Castle Dor turned out to be a retelling of the Tristan and Isolde legend, only set in XIX century Cornwall. 

It was written, though never finished because of his death, by Arthur Quiller-Couch. I first found out about him because he was mentioned in 84, Charing Cross Road as Helene Hanff's mentor. Quiller-Couch's daughter, after his death, asked Daphne du Maurier to finish the novel. I couldn't tell where his writing stopped, and hers began. Which is a good thing, considering.

Still, I was not impressed by the book. The plot didn't grip me. The retelling was too straightforward to be particularly interesting; there wasn't much of a twist to it. If you have any familiarity with the legend, you know what's going to happen, and it just - happens. To make things cheesier, a side character keeps pointing out the similarities of every situation in the novel with the Tristan and Isolde legend. Why I'll never know. There was a feeble attempt to create some suspense at the end, but it failed.

The characters were weak, too. Linnet was shallow and vain, her husband cartoonishly despicable, Amyot seemed just hot and dull-witted. None of these characters inspired sympathy. To me, Daphne du Maurier's strongest trait is her ability to write insightful, complex, ambiguous characters. Castle Dor completely lacked these. The doctor side-character never justified occupying pages of the book - I kept waiting to discover a compelling reason for him being there, but it never arrived. 

The star-crossed romance was lackluster as well. It felt less like a story of love, and more like a story of two attractive young people meeting a hot person their age for the first time, and immediately applying all their energy to get into each other's pants before even getting acquainted. They didn't get to know each other, and there wasn't much to know anyway since they were both flat and boring characters.

The book didn't offer anything else either, so I have no redeeming qualities to list. It wasn't torturous to read, that's all.