Rating: 1/5

“She’s dearer than life itself, that’s all I know”

WTF did I just read?

Like seriously, I have no idea. I started this book and the prologue was weird, but I thought ‘hey, it’s just the prologue…’ haha silly me thinking it would get better. Nope, it only got worse.

I picked this book believing it was only written by Daphne Du Maurier. I’m not that into the Tristan and Isolde myth, but I thought if Daphne Du Maurier with her haunting storytelling takes on that legend, it can only be good and atmospheric. What my book edition didn’t tell me however is the fact that this book is not only written by Daphne, but majorly by Sir Arthur Quiller-Crouch. It was originally his story and writing, sadly he died before he could finish it and it was his daughter’s wish for Du Maurier to finish it, which she did. There are traces of Daphne’s usual writing style in this book, but it is mostly blink and you miss it. Most of the writing seems still to be Quiller-Crouch’s (or Daphne did a fabulous job writing like him, I don’t know I have never read anything by him) and let me tell you it is just not mine. 

The writing seems more like a scientific report than an actual novel, it is artificial, gives you only rough descriptions of everything that is going on, including characters and setting, there is no atmosphere at all and for a retelling of a tragic love story one important thing is missing, the actual love.

There is no build up, no charm, no passion, no feelings. There are just two characters or rather “names” (because for an actual character I demand a personality) and they fall in love and it is forbidden because she is married. Also there are a bunch of other names. 

The author(‘s) reference the original tale of Tristan and Isolde a lot and to me that seemed weird. Meta can be good, but in a story that is promoted as an actual ‘modern’ retelling, the Meta aspects felt highly out of place.

There is a lot of esoteric stuff in the book as well which is simply not my cup of tea.

I hardly ever stop reading a book before finishing it, but I gave up on this one about 150 pages into the story. There was nothing that kept my interest for the slightest and continuing reading it would seem like a waste of time. 

Conclusion: Love story without love. Odd writing style. Just not mine.

Recommendation: I wouldn’t even recommend it to hardcore Daphne Du Maurier fans, because it hardly seemed to be her writing at all. The style is very different, I mean I think it could be good for some people, but I just don’t get it.