Rating: 3/5

Everyone is familiar with historical fiction but there is a special branch of Latin American historical fiction which I’d describe as Heroic Women; a specialist in this is Isabel Allende but there are many others, both men and women, who dabble in this genre. Typically, they are the women behind the power but they can also be women who brush up against those in power and other famous persons of their time. 

This is an example of the latter since Laura Díaz is a witness to Mexican history of the 20th century, as well as being an artist, which brings her into contact with Frida Kahlo and Diego Rivera; in fact, as the book begins, she’s spotted as one of the figures in Rivera’s famous industry mural in the Detroit Institute of Arts. She’s also a wife, lover, and grandmother, all of which are deeply affected by the tumultuous and often violent events which took place in Mexico in that century. (A warning: if you are not familiar with Mexican history, be prepared to Google to understand the power struggles at the time of the Mexican Revolution; there are familiar names such as Pancho Villa and Emiliano Zapata but a lot of other names as well, such as Porfirio Díaz, Orozco, Huerta, Obregón, Madero, Carranza and Cárdenas; it’s not essential to know these but Laura is affected by all these power shifts, which are frequently by assassination.) I actually found the history more interesting than Laura’s story as I don’t think Carlos Fuentes wrote her well; the book’s format seemed to be some event in Laura’s life followed by a poetic rhapsody on the nature of love and life and I felt it dragged a lot. Her story is interesting but the events are more interesting; for instance, there is a section on the Americans fleeing McCarthyism and living in a colony in Mexico, and another on the student unrest and massacre just before the 1968 Summer Olympics. These more directly affect Laura emotionally, more than the Revolution does.

In the end, I found the book a little tedious but it could well have been that I just wasn’t hooked by yet another Heroic Latina. One reviewer said that Laura Díaz was destined to be as famous as Madame Bovary – hmmm, apparently not, but worth checking out if this is the type of book you like and you’re ready to read something other than Isabel Allende.