Rating: 4/5

It's an anthology paperback and fragile. I don't remember where I found it but it isn't one I read back in the day. 

First up was the novella I've avoided for fifty years, "A Boy and His Dog" and after reading the first pages of the story here, I will continue to avoid it. "Strangely romantic" it's described on the back cover. Well. It takes all kinds. 

The second story was that years' second place winner by Ursula K. Le Guin and I knew that story from one of her story collections. She won best novel that years for Left Hand of Darkness. [I need to reread that novel; at the time I read it for the first time I objected to the use of masculine pronouns, but more to the point I simply could not buy the premise that at least 20% of the population was in Kimmer at any one time.]

The next stories were good, all surprising one way or another. Except for Le Guin, all the authors, including the front and back matter, are white males. All the POV characters in the stories are white males. Sex is always an issue, sometimes the focus of the stories. Le Guin included people of color, another author included other races as disguise. No animals. A few women as romantic others. 

This was a great year, 1969, for SF and Fantasy. The previous year was great too, when several favorite authors won, including my favorite SF novel, Rite of Passage by Alexei Panshin, who wrote the essay at the end of this collection. Panshin makes observations about the dwindling number of short stories published each year. He is skeptical that television is the prime reason that "pulp stories" had lost venues. I am just old enough to remember when most magazines featured short fiction, later that the women's magazines and others still publishing short stories in the late '60s were cutting fiction. Panshin suggests that the only people reading "literary stories" were the family members of the authors. Ouch. (And I have thought that too, though my family do not.) But the market for SF was growing in 1969, and this is somewhat true even today. A recent talk by author Molly Gloss at the Pacific University MFA residency took pains to explain why so many mainstream realist writers are writing SF and Fantasy and why students might want to follow suit.