Rating: 4/5

Two Years Holiday by Jules Verne

 

What a magic title- Two Years Holiday. It makes you want to read the book, just for the fun of taking this ride with the protagonists.

Or simply to keep it on your lap, to read when you have a little spare time of your own.

But if you want to read on, this is not about Jules Verne, but about my own ten years holiday… it’s been so long since I have read Jules Verne that I can only speak about the fantasy, the idea suggested by the book.

But is it all that desirable to have such long holidays?

I guess it depends.

There’s a lucky guy who has had more than two years, as a matter of fact, I don’t even know exactly how many years of holidays I have got …for I am that lucky bastard.

I did my share of work in my twenties and thirties: there were times when I had two, complementary jobs. I earned very good money and invested it in Algernon. Socrate (that is his real name) is the key player in that company and the initial agreement was that I will not interfere in the running of the company.

I had worked for AT&amp;T, but they pulled out of Europe, with the lucrative business of long distance calls falling apart.

At the same time, I was organizing tours for the American Embassy – I have taken on a tour one ambassador Joe Guest and the…guests of another- Rosapepe. Because Algernon was going so well, I gave up the tours business…

So there I am, with about ten years holiday on my hands.

“There is nothing either good or bad, but thinking makes it so” – Shakespeare

You can look at this free time as a gift from above, which I did and spent a lot of time reading and fooling around, or think in terms of the condemned man in a Twilight Saga episode, who found that he is sent to Hell, and in the Inferno, there is nothing you can do in a meaningful manner.

 

My ten years holiday have opened up a lot of opportunities: I have build a house in Rasnov and spent three years there, I have visited almost all the German Fortified Churches in that area and much further beyond, in some cases a few times and I have read a lot, albeit some of the books passing through my hands did not stay there long… I became a fussy reader.

 

As a final thought for Jules Verne’s book: I remember how profoundly its reading has marked me- in a psychological interpretation, this book might have created in me the desire for a long sabbatical, retirement from “The Maddening Crowd”. If that happened, thank you Jules Verne.

www.realini.blogspot.ro