Rating: 5/5

The Years with Laura Diaz by Carlos Fuentes has been in my library for a lot of years. Little did I know what a treasure it was. It was thought to be one of Fuentes' most important novels in several decades. His previous masterpiece was The Death of Artemio Cruz and next on my list. The Years with Laura Diaz is a sweeping family saga beginning at the close of the nineteenth century in Veracruz, Mexico and moves to Mexico City as it traces the migration during the Mexican Revolution and its aftermath. Also a big throughline in the novel is the significance of the Spanish Civil War and its far-reaching effects.

  "She followed the white crow beyond the limits of what she knew, learning about and loving from that moment on, forever, everything she saw and touched, as if that day of death had been set aside for her to learn something unrepeatable, something only for her, and only for the age Laura Diaz had reached at that instant, haivng been born on May 12, 1898, when the Virgin dressed in white came walking into sight with her coat. . . "

"Laura now realized that for years the Spanish Civil War had been the epicenter of her historical life, not the Mexican Revolution, which had passed through the state of Veracruz so mildly and tangentially, as if dying in the Gulf were a unique, moving, and untouchable privilege reserved for Laura's older brother, Santiago Diaz, sole protagonist, as far as she was concerned, of the 1910 insurrection."

What is beautiful about The Years with Laura Diaz is the emphasis throughout the book on the art of murals and what they depict in the many stories of the religious, civil, moral and personal memories of a people and a culture. And this heartbreaking and beautiful book by Fuentes brings those stories to life, in the voices from the past conserving a part of our history. This is a richly woven tapestry in this compelling and sweeping narrative covering the life of Laura Diaz, a mother, grandmother and great-grandmother. Looming large in the life of Laura Diaz is her relationship with Diego Rivera and Frida Kahlo over the years. In fact, the mural on the cover of the book is one that Rivera painted when he was invited to Detroit in 1932 to decorate the walls of the Detroit Institue of Arts. As Laura grows into a politically committed artist, we are witness to her life of tragedy and loss but she is happy as she has borne witness to the darkest forces of Mexico's corrupt regime and has helped to affect the course of history throughout the twentieth century in Mexico.