Rating: 5/5

Well, my goodness, what to say about such a great book?

First, thank you to Tina for finding this in a box of books 3 years ago, reading it and introducing this forgotten author to all of us. Second, thank you to Wyndy for reading and championing Stephen Becker with a great review. Third, thank you to Hoopla for making Becker's books available through the library system.

It's only March 5th and this may be my favorite book of the year, and I've been reading some great ones lately. It's described as a courtroom drama, but it's way more than that. It's also a coming-of-age story, although the person struggling to mature is our narrator, a 29 year old State appointed judge. A beautiful young wife is murdered, her husband is arested, and, as Shakespeare would say, thereby hangs a tale.

These pages contain not only a whodunit, with edge of your seat writing, but philosophy, history, quotes from learned men of the past, men vs women, old vs young, justice vs injustice, and surprises that knock you for a loop, but it is also rife with ironic humor throughout. That always makes a book special to me, the type of humor that elevates the characters into real people and imparts wisdom at the same time. I especially enjoyed the relationship between Judge Lewis and his native American clerk, John Digby, and that of he and his mother Eulalia. She was brilliant in her non-traditional way.

I'm not ashamed to say that the conclusion of this novel brought me to tears, for several different reasons, not the least of which is the beauty of the legal system when justice is finally done. I leave you with a quote, which just happens to be the last paragraph of this book:
 "Wiggle your fingers. Wiggle your toes. Go naked to the market. Rejoice in all mornings. Join hands and kiss. Laugh. Love. If you cannot live, pity. If you cannot pity, have mercy. That man is not your brother; he is you". 

Do yourself a favor and read this book, without expectations. I promise you a great experience.