Rating: 3/5

(Confession: I’ve never read any of Clifford Simak’s work before, so my observations below might seem pedantic or too detailed, but they are truly my first impressions of his writing.)

A fish-out-of-water tale, this story about a spaceman with few intact memories returning to Earth took a while to get going. But at approximately one-third through the book, the hook was placed, and I could see the plot developing (finally). Given that this novel was published in 1967, I had to ignore some of the stilted dialogue and the (now tired) tropes of automated houses, robotic helpers, male chauvinism, and nonchalant expectations of great advancements in human health. But the core of this story is solid. I especially liked the multiple POVs taken by the author, though at times they were more telling than showing and had long &amp; winding passages, some beautiful, some unnecessarily meandering. The hooks placed by Simak intrigued me and reminded me of Piers Anthony’s “Orn” novel, a tale well told from a nonhuman perspective (long before Piers ruined his reputation, IMO, with the ongoing Xanth series). 

THE GOOD: In this book, Simak is quite prescient in his discussions about bioengineering and what DNA modifications might lead to (but to a very exaggerated effect), and that intrigued me enough to keep reading past page 50, when I thought I might give up on it, then page 75, and finally past page 100, when the seemingly disoriented chapters finally converged. So be patient with the book as it’s far from the quicker set hooks of modern day science-fiction. 

THE BAD: At times, the character voices sound too similar, without enough distinction between the different personas as I’d prefer; not bad but not great either. The love interest is not well developed and seems to stand in only as a vehicle for some decisions made later by the main (male) character, typical of sci-fi from the chauvinist 1960s &amp; 1970s. Also, Simak’s writing style is quite wordy and repetitious at times, causing my attention to drift. So, if you’re looking for a thriller sci-fi drama or a hard science fiction tale, this is NOT it. 

CONCLUSION: The theme of conscience and what makes an entity human gave me a deeper appreciation for Simak’s writing. The book is balanced well between philosophical arguments and action sequences, but the material and writing style have not aged gracefully, IMO. For all its faults, the tale is an interesting journey into what makes for a “human,” and is a good introspective look at a “classic sci-fi” novel. It does make me want to read his best known work, “City”, and compare the two books.