Rating: 4/5

Third read – 27 August 2025 – Rating 4/5. Technically, Revolt in 2100 is a collection, as it consists of three separately published works. But the longest one, “If This Goes On –“, takes up about 2/3 of the page count. The two shorter stories are tangentially related, and are included here in order of the chronology of Robert Heinlein’s Future History. I re-read the book this time because “Misfit“ is discussed in Lecture 7 “The Golden Age of Science Fiction Stories” of The Great Course’s How Great Science Fiction Works.

If This Goes On –, was first published in two parts as If This Goes On… in Astounding February and March 1940, it was revised and expanded for inclusion in this book in 1953. I don’t really know which things were changed. The setting is in later twenty-first United States, ruled as a neo-Christian theocracy by the Prophet Incarnate. The story is told in first-person by the young John Lyle, a proud West Point graduate who has been given the plum assignment of guarding the Prophet as a member of the Angels of the Lord. He meets Sister Judith, a similarly naïve young Deaconess who is awaiting her chance to be chosen to serve the Prophet. Their simple attraction to one another leads John and Judith into a deep conspiracy of heretical revolution. The action and their perils are well drawn and pull this story along purely on its plot during the Second American Revolution. At the same time, Heinlein uses this as a platform to warn against religious authority and present a humanistic alternative, and previews some of his later ideas of sexual freedom. I recommend this short novel version of the story. The original has won a Retro Hugo Award for novella. My rating 4/5.

Coventry was first published in Astounding July 1940. It is set a half century after the Second American Revolution, which has brought about a libertarian government. David MacKinnon is a belligerent young man, convicted of “damaging another free citizen.” He is given a choice of psychological treatment or exile. He chooses exile and is thrown through a forcefield barrier into a land of violent strongman governance. The story relates his progress through that land, ultimately learning about himself. It has won a Prometheus Hall of Fame Award for libertarian SF. In my opinion, the chaos within Coventry somewhat undermines the libertarian utopian theme promoted by Heinlein. My rating 3/5.

Misfit was first published in Astounding November 1939. It is a lovingly crafted technical/scientific description of a space mission to construct a base on an asteroid. The crew are misfits who do not conform well to the society of twenty-second century America. But there is almost no plot to pull you through the descriptions. Rating 2/5.

Second read – 3 February 1981. While in graduate engineering school at Washington University in St. Louis, I found a used copy, and took the opportunity to re-read it. I was really surprised to find Wash U mentioned in it, although I don’t know what “auditorium” he was talking about. Heinlein grew up in Missouri, and must have become aware of the campus then.

First read – 1 June 1969. My father was a teacher, and we traveled summers for him to attend graduate school. I borrowed this from a box of books at the house of a classmate of his when I was 14. It was a little more mature than the Heinlein juveniles I was used to, but clearly the same author.