Rating: 5/5

Stephen Becker (1927-1999) has the legacy of a great writer and being “an extraordinary man,” according to John Cheever in his letters. “A Covenant of Death” is one of those books that restore a reader’s faith in good fiction, entertaining and written with great skill. That was the hallmark of Becker’s books.

“Covenant” takes place in a small southwestern town that, in 1922, was “part frontier, part plantation, part pleasure, part cruelty, part old Mexico, part clanking modernity and, as noted, part murder.” It is this murder that is explored by the author, bringing forward details of the act, the arrest, the trial, and subsequent aftermath that befalls the alleged murderer. The narrator is a twenty-nine year old inexperienced judge who is beset with life’s problems, none of which seem particularly earth shattering until he takes charge of the legal proceedings that follow the actual trial. His confidence is shaken.

It’s a great book, written by an author with skills that allow him to speak elegantly, use immaculate sentences and project absolutely spot-on phrasing. His verbiage, although flowery at times, is mannerly and refined. His legal maneuvering is plausible and sometimes innovative, although I find no record of a legal background in his resume. His characterizations are carefully honed with each participant being clearly defined with qualities that are essential to the story. 

Becker contracted Guillain-Barre syndrome when he was 32 and was unable to walk. Most of his life after that was spent in a wheelchair. In spite of the handicap his life was full with an active family, adventurous travel, and an extraordinary career as a man of letters, writing novels, biographies, screenplays, reviews, translations, and, finally, with a short career as an English professor.

Needless to say, the author does not need these accolades. But I offer them as enticement to you, the reader, to get to know Stephen Becker and to experience the pleasure of his writing skills.