Rating: 3/5

Lovecraft remained dissatisfied with The Case of Charles Dexter Ward. It was his longest work of fiction, and he referred to as “a cumbrous, creaking bit of self-conscious antiquarianism.” He composed it in 1927, but made no attempt to revise it in the ten years of life that remained to him, even though short horror novels like Ward were more marketable and paid better than the novellas and long short stories in which he excelled.

For years I thought H.P. too harsh in his assessment, for I liked Ward when I first read it. It evokes H.P.’s home city of Providence with love, incorporates a number of autobiographical details in its portrait of Charles Dexter Ward, amd convincingly combines in one lengthy sustained narrative the colonial witch scare atmosphere (including a brief reference to Salem), the dark romanticism of Hawthorne, and the customary Lovecraftian subterranean search for the Elder Gods and their minions. The two accounts of underground exploration—first in the Curwen era, later in Ward’s—gave me the absolute willies, and I believe I rated the novel more highly than it deserved because of the two good scares it delivered.

It really is a bit of a yawner, though, particularly the Curwen sections. Too much about the colonial period is related third hand by narrator Marinus Bicknell Willett, whose veiled hints and slightly pompous objectivity often almost put me to sleep. (OK, I’ll be honest. At least twice, it did put me to sleep.) The use of contemporaneous accounts culled from diaries and letters would have made the this early narrative more vivid, but without them it is only the final raid by the good men of Providence that makes the Curwen story come alive.

There was something else, though, that interested me this time around. I realized that The Case of Charles Dexter Ward is the closest thing Lovecraft ever came to a detective novel. Willett is the novel’s detective, and like many detectives before and after, he looks for the solution to the present difficulty—the mental disintegration and disappearance of Ward—in the criminal and occult history of the past (Joseph Curwen). There are detours and red herrings along the way, but eventually our hero finds his way to the criminal’s ancient lair, where evil and danger await.

My advice is to give Ward try. Skim a bit of the first half, don’t take the mystery too seriously, and I’ll bet you’re be good and scared—at least twice—just as I was.