Rating: 2/5

Welcome to the best game show on Goodreads, the pre-review game Who Said That? [Insert audience applause] Guess if the following quotes are from The Alchemist by Paulo Coelho OR from a CEO/inspirational memoir:
1. The secret of life, though, is to fall seven times and to get up eight times.
2. The only thing worse than starting something and failing is not starting something.
3. Chase the vision, not the money, the money will end up following you.
4. Remember that wherever your heart is, there you will find your treasure.
5. Sometimes theres a sign that something really great is about to happen. You’re about to grow and learn a lot more about yourself.
6. Life is fragile. We’re not guaranteed a tomorrow so give it everything you’ve got.
7. People are capable, at any time in their lives, of doing what they dream of.
8. A dream doesn't become reality through magic; it takes sweat, determination and hard work.
9. There is only one thing that makes a dream impossible to achieve: the fear of failure.
10. Pessimists may be right in the end, but an optimist has a much better time getting there.
11. Without passion, you don’t have any energy, and without energy, you simply have nothing.
12. When we strive to become better than we are, everything around us becomes better, too.

Answers
1. Alchemist
2. Seth Godin, Founder of Squidoo
3. Tony Hsieh, CEO of Zappos
4. Alchemist
5. Marissa Mayer, CEO of Yahoo
6. Tim Cooke, CEO of Apple
7. Alchemist
8. Colin Powell, former US Secretary of State
9. Alchemist
10. Samuel R Allen, CEO of Deere
11. Whoever the ghost writer is for Donald Trump books
12. Alchemist

Jokes aside, The Alchemist by Paulo Coelho is an endlessly quotable book. It reads like a fable, with very catchy and accessible writing that is meant to empower and make you feel good. This really works for a lot of people—I mean this was a widely successful novel—and I’m happy that so many people could be moved and inspired by a book. Especially a book that unites people around the world by being an international success. Unfortunately, for myself at least, it all comes across as a pristine facade without much behind it, offering something that can be quickly digested but isn’t actually filling. This is a book that I recall enjoying enough when I read it as a teen but haven’t thought of since, so when someone picked it as our next read for our book club I was excited to revisit it seeing as I remembered literally nothing about it. I hate to say it, but being fun but forgettable is my takeaway from it again.

‘There is only one way to learn... It's through action.’

Coelho said the book was written very quickly because ‘the book was already written in my soul,’ and in the forward he discusses how this novel was his own Personal Legend. ‘I was living my own metaphor,’ he said, being thrilled just to get it picked up by a Brazilian publisher who, in 1988, only ran 900 copies assuming it would not be a big success. The book ended up taking off, with the 1993 English translation becoming a massive hit and lead to numerous further translations. Coelho even holds a Guinness World Record for “most translations of a single title signed by the author in 1 sitting”, signing his book in 53 different translated editions at a book event in Germany. So I can really appreciate that aspect, and his own personal journey into publishing and believing in himself is honestly better than the book itself. 

  

Fun fact: The Alchemist had a big boost in sales when then-President Bill Clinton was photographed reading it.

For those who don’t know, the story follows a young boy, Santiago, as he journeys across the desert and meets a lot of interesting people along the way. Literally every person has a pearl of positive wisdom to share it seems, and it becomes a rapid fire of empowerment quotes that could all go on one of those inspirational posters made for office walls in the 90s. Actually, I’m fairly certain I’ve seen one that quoted this book. The characters all feel like a mouthpiece for Coehlo to pass along his positive message, or wisdom, and one can easily imagine this being a self-help book had he not decided to attach a fictional narrative to it. It is a nice message, that you have to believe in yourself and in your goals and, if you truly do (“only those who are true of heart” vibes like in fairy tales) the universe will conspire to help you achieve your goal. Which is a nice inspirational message and sometimes that is what you need to hear to break free from self doubt. Particularly as another primary message is that we must overcome fear to accomplish what we need to do. ‘Don't give in to your fears,’ Coelho writes, ‘If you do, you won't be able to talk to your heart.’ So great, yea, believe in yourself. I dig that.

‘To realize one's destiny is a person's only real obligation.’

I do, however, see it as a bit of a back-patting perspective. Like yes, if you are successful it is nice to feel like it is because you are pure of heart. He tells us that those who don’t follow their dreams end up in ruin and sadness. This is sort of a success fallacy in a way, as it implies that if things are bad its because you just didn’t try hard enough. Which…ehhhhh…I mean there are a lot of forces acting in society that gatekeep and sometimes it’s more than just not overcoming adversity. And I get it, keep trying, yea, but it feels a bit like shaming? Which is honestly overthinking it though as this book is not that nuanced or deep (something I kept saying during debates over minor details during book club: “I don’t think he even considered that and its beside the point because it’s not actually that deep”). It is meant to be a fun and empowering story that paints in broad strokes and yea, I get why it means a lot to many people. For me it just seemed a bit flat and like a snack when I wanted a meal.

‘Everyone seems to have a clear idea of how other people should lead their lives, but none about his or her own.’ 
Okay, fine, I don’t know how to write a good book or how to live my life either, but I just know this one wasn’t it for me.

I did appreciate how it was aimed at a general positive idea of spirituality that, while using different religions, was not necessarily religious. Spiritual, or mystic would seem the better term. I liked the idea of the universe, the sand, the wind, etc as conscious entities that can collaborate with you. While I really disliked the deus ex machina ending, the whole idea of the world as a spiritual presence was well done. Coelho does sort of pull an orientalism in his depiction as an outsider of the region as this wild and savage land full of wise sages and cutthroat robbers, but it does seem with the aim of capturing the feel of One Thousand and One Nights or other tales of adventure and ‘finding yourself’ in exotic locale. Which I think is a topic that people have had a more nuanced discussion on since this book was written.

‘It's the possibility of having a dream come true that makes life interesting,’ Coelho writes, and this I can agree with. However, in The Alchemist, the general tone of the book is that dreams seem a thing only for men. Fatima, Santiago’s love interest, lacks much agency in the tale and is more or less written as a prize for following his Personal Legend. She is an element of his journey, while I guess he is all her journey gets to be. He tells her ‘I love you because the entire universe conspired to help me find you,’ which…isn’t all that romantic or great? Hey, the universe popped you into my life, guess you’ll do for a bride. C’mon, man, does she have any personality or intelligence you enjoy and don’t just tell me how beautiful she is. Didn’t vibe with any of that aspect of the book.

I also didn’t really like the ending. Sure it is riffing on the whole “it’s the journey not the destination” aspect but it felt a bit flat for me with the deus ex machina moment. It is a happy ending though, and one full of success and rewards. As a bookclub member pointed out, it sort of resonates with a quote by T.S. Eliot: ‘We shall not cease from exploration And the end of all our exploring Will be to arrive where we started And know the place for the first time.’

So in the end, I’m mostly ambivalent to this book. I see why people enjoy it and it is admittedly pretty and sweet and uplifting. It’s a good vibe to be in. It didn’t do much for me, but that’s alright too. 

2.5/5