Rating: 5/5

“She was surpassingly alive and exuberantly feminine, and did not know that she was about to die.”

This was how the story began. Mrs. Louise Talbot (age 27) was considered ‘the most disturbing women in Soledad City’ because apparently there was not a man in town who had not surreptitiously lusted after her. Four hours after briefly chatting with her neighbors, she was dead. On returning home after drinks, her husband, Bryan, found Louise dead in her bathrobe with bruises on her neck. Bryan was alleged to have killed her.

The 1923 trial of Bryan Talbot for first degree murder was recalled by Judge Ben Lewis forty years later. At that time, 29-year-old Ben was one of two district judges of the state criminal court. This was his first capital trial. The timing was poor as the imperative to prove his worth despite his youth coincided with Ben dealing with matters of the heart.

Soledad was a small town where neighbors peered into each other’s window. The author fanned the interest surrounding Bryan Talbot’s trial by calling it “a community bloodletting”. “To the Mexicans, he was a gringo and a Protestant. Solidarity had come to the town, and Bryan Talbot was the common enemy, and everyone had a reason to be happy. Bryan Talbot had sinned against God and broken ancient laws, and for a few days everyone else in Soledad City felt virtuous.” Only the defense attorney, Oliver Parmelee, the town’s most distinguished lawyer, believed with absolute certainty in Bryan’s innocence. The same cannot be said of the town folks; the County District Attorney, Emil Dietrich acting for the prosecution; the senior Judge Alvin Hochstadter; and perhaps Lewis himself even though he caught a faint odor of wrong.

There were lots of characters and I had to take notes and retrace my steps to remember who’s who. That they were interesting, nosy, and gossipy added to the fever surrounding the trial. I kept on turning pages in hopes of finding out who killed Louise Talbot and why.

A gripping court case aside, this novel explored the notions of justice and the all-powerful role of the judge. From his late father who was a county sheriff, Lewis learned this:

”Justice is not to inflict pain… Justice was public and rightness was private and if they were not the same you chose rightness and did not inflict pain.” 

Part of the thrill is following Lewis’ daunting responsibility to do no wrong and to untangle the complex web of reasoning that must do justice not just to the dead but also the accused. This is a novel that will appeal to friends who are in the law profession. 

I read with bated breath as I sensed the lawyers’ discomfort with a young judge, and I wondered what verdict Lewis would make. 

You have to read the ending for yourself. This is an extremely compelling novel with much depth on the value of human life and how justice should be served. It deserves an outstanding five-star rating.