Rating: 3/5

I’ve had this book in my library for decades — it sat beside other Lovecraft books that I’ve read and re-read, yet this is my first reading of The Case of Charles Dexter Ward. Likely it’s because Lovecraft’s style is such that he’s much easier to digest in short stories than in book length tales like this one. But here at the end of a month of binge reading H.P. Lovecraft I finally got around to reading this, his first book length effort. What I found is that my initial impression was correct — Lovecraft was far more effective when using the short story format than that of the novel. 

The Case of Charles Dexter Ward has all the themes and tropes that Lovecraft fans are familiar with. There’s the young, sensitive scholar (Ward) who becomes obsessed with unhealthy occult lore, to his detriment. There’s the menacing figure of an unholy necromancer, in this case, Joseph Curwen, Ward’s ancestor who lived in colonial times, but somehow is still able to exert evil influence into Ward’s 20th century present. There’s regrettable research into arcane knowledge best left alone, and charnel cemetery delving. There are the familiar themes of an evil taint passed down through centuries in the blood, and of the madness and obsession that taint can cause. There’s the idea, often revisited in Lovecraft’s work, of the transmigration of souls. Of course, such familiar props as the unclean book, Necronomicon, by the mad Arab, Abdul Alhazred are here as well. 

Lovecraft told this tale in both his 1920s present and in long passages flashing back to the colonial period when the sinister Joseph Curwen was pursuing his nefarious necromancies. (He ties in the Salem witch panic to this portion of his story.) There is actually a pretty good story here, but it is engulfed in so much unnecessary detail and superfluous description that its impact is blunted. Edited down to a long short story this tale could have been one of Lovecraft’s great stories, but in this bloated novel form I just couldn’t fully appreciate it. I give it two and a half stars, rounded up because of what it could have been.