Rating: 4/5

Having randomly picked this old classic off the shelf for a re-read I wonder how random it really was or whether my subconscious was playing tricks on me. Having just recently discussed another old classic sci-fi that has more recently risen to prominence " The Handmaid's Tale" it was interesting to look at some parallels between the two.

Revolt in 2100 is actually three stories in one cover, however the first uses up 140 of the 187 pages while the other two are in the nature of small vignettes that look at a couple of details after the 'revolt' of the title, they use new themes and characters with no reference to the ones from the first story.

In the main story 'If this goes on' we follow the story of a young and pious John Lyle having lived all his life in an America that has become a religious tyranny of a country, led by a 'Prophet Incarnate' and controlled by propaganda machine that in this future has risen to a science, a religious military and all the other trappings of an oppressive regime.

John Lyle who has never questioned this world of his is a guard in the elite Angels of the Lord, the personal guards of the Prophet Incarnate in New Jerusalem and one night he meets a young woman (a species somewhat alien to his experience). Sister Judith is newly come to be one of the 'Virgins' a holy deaconess in a group whose role it is to serve the prophet in all ways. You see where this is going? So Sister Judith loses her naivety one day when she finds out first hand that 'Virgins of the prophet' is code for "sex salves of the prophet". John Lyle, in the throes of puppy love tries to save her, in the process becoming involved in 'The Cabal'. The Cabal, described by the government of the prophet as heretic devil worshipers, are in fact Rebels (though their is a coy mention of them going back to their 'original purpose' at one stage. What was Heinlein referencing I wonder? The Masons or similar perhaps?). John Lyle and his friend Zeb join their group and sister Judith is saved from sexual slavery.

There is a lot more to the story than just the above, John Lyle is discovered, escapes, flees across country, the rebels rise and conquer most satisfyingly and in it all is the best part of the old science fiction which looks at how societies could evolve, at all the 'what ifs' of people and what they do. These days it would be called speculative fiction, but it is a good story either way.

Now Heinlein is not good at writing women in general, but the women in this story actually do quite well. They are not as fleshed out as the men, but they make suitable vessels for Heinlein to examine power bases between men and women, equality and sexual equality and the uses of made of women under religious control. While this story is dated, a lot of the points he is making are relevant still today, where gender equality in religion is once again in question. Heinlein is more about the societal level, where The Handmaid's Tale was more about personal experience, but, honestly, I feel Heinlein had a lot more to say about the topic AND did it better.

Heinlein always has a lot to say; in fact a lot of the narrative is kind of preachy, John Lyle is forced to face and overcome his own prejudices over many things and that is the platform Heinlein uses to address human idiocies, semantics, human idiosyncrasies and a few more of his old favourites.

I really enjoyed all three of the stories, but the first was the best.