Rating: 5/5

In these excerpts of letters to his brother, Van Gogh’s words are powerful and insightful, making this one of the best books of letters I’ve read with thoughts on art, faith, and life as well as on Van Gogh’s own work and experience. One could quote a passage from almost every page. Reading Van Gogh's words about his mental illness toward the end of his life was especially painful. He struggled so long to find his way in life and came to Arles with such bright hopes for his own work and for others, only to become chronically ill.

This is the kind of unscholarly collection of letters that would usually drive me crazy: most of the letters are not specifically dated; the text of numerous letters is run together; omissions are not indicated; and, there is no key identifying many of the people referred to. However, when this book was originally published in 1937, there was no reasonably priced edition of Van Gogh’s letters available, and the author’s intention was to fit in as many of Vincent Van Gogh’s words as possible, so adding lines for dates, spaces between each letter, etc. would have reduced the space available for the letters themselves. 

I recommend reading this book with some supplemental information to fill in the blanks; the short, well illustrated biography “Van Gogh: The Passionate Eye” by Pascal Bonafoux worked well to provide background. 

“What you wrote to me about the painter Serret greatly interests me. Such a man, who finally produced something with pathos, as the blossom of a hard and difficult life, is a wonder, like the black hawthorn, or, better still, the crooked old apple trunk that at a certain moment bears blossoms which are among the most delicate and most virginal things under the sun.

‘When a rough man bears blossoms like a flowering plant’— yes, that is beautiful to see, but before that time he has had to stand a great deal of winter cold, more than those who afterwards sympathize with him can know. The artist’s life, and what an artist is, that is very curious. How deep it is —how infinitely deep.” 1883

“Have patience with me, brother, and do not suspect me of ill-will. You will point out to me that I myself know full well that in many respects I am very difficult to deal with. Yes, that is true, and I too have to reckon with this. There is, however, an excuse for me; that is the passion and the frequent absorbedness which everyone who paints, writes, or composes must needs have.” 1883