Rating: 5/5

The CHRONICLER OF THE WINDS is a work of such haunting imagery, vivid emotional appeal, and serious intent that any attempt to characterize it or review it is doomed to reveal the faltering skills of the commentator. This is a novel of such infinite interpretation, mythic splendor, and humanistic intent that it cannot simply be read, but must be savored as a rare literary treat.

Mankell, noted for his Wallander detective series, provides a diversion from his earlier writings to enter the world of Magic Realism...and indeed, this is a CHRONICLE OF A DEATH FORETOLD, although I would argue that the influences are largely African (notably, Amos Tutuola, Wole Soyinka, Ben Okri, and, most importantly, Mia Couto) rather than Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Isabel Allende, and other Latin American authors. Mankell, director of the Teatro Avenida, spends much of his time in Mozambique, which is the setting for this novel. (Although unnamed, I can verify that Maputo is the city in which the action takes place.) Clearly, however, the tale is one that could be related among the unwanted urchins of any major city, but most tragically in the Third World.

The narrator, Jose Antonio Maria Vaz, is a baker by trade until he meets the novel's protagonist Nelio, a dying 10-year sage of the streets, who has a Scheherazade-like tale to relate over nine nights. After escaping the death and destruction of his village by bandits, Nelio begins his metaphysical and actual journey by meeting a "white dwarf," who has lost his way for "nineteen years, eight months, and four days," a wise old lizard woman, and a drunken con man much like Fagin. Later, after finding a sleeping space within the belly of a colonial equestrian statue, he encounters a variety of street kids, some of whom envisage sea monsters, grow vegetables with dirt in their pockets, and even seemingly turn themselves invisible to invade department stores and the presidential palace. Nelio, despite his youth and small stature, possesses both the moral and spiritual authority to lead this band of children in their efforts to survive the horrific threats and relentless cruelties of the mean urban streets. The ordeals of Nelio's life and death so overwhelm the narrator that he determines to abandon his profession and devote himself to reciting the cautionary tale that he has listened to over successive nights.

Although Mankell offers an almost Hobbesian view of life as "solidary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short," there is a redemptive quality to the strength of Nelio and the street children as he depicts their efforts to fight for the right to dream, hope, and live.