Rating: 4/5

“You’ve really gotta read this book. Ram Dass says it’s SO Far Out!”

´Far Out’ was a much-bandied-about-by-hippies catchphrase in 1971, and was likewise prized among flower children like my friend Maria - who said those words to me back then.

But, Ram WHO?

Ram Dass, aka Professor Richard Alpert, had - like his buddy, Professor Timothy Leary - “tuned in, turned on and dropped out.”

And, not only that, but Leary had sworn this holy Tibetan book exactly mirrored the process of “turning on”, hence its enduring sacred value, and had written his own cult classic on how to emulate these ‘high’ sages.

In five easy hits.

Really? You mean all the great religions are derived from drug experiences? 

Ahem...

Such, anyway, was the prevailing “ineffable teaching” of these gurus. And that, along with a buck fifty, may have even bought them a cup of coffee to wake up with.
***

Well, you may have noticed that I’m reviewing the Evans-Wertz translation. 

For me that’s the one to get if you, in any way, see the process of dying as a journey to the beyond. It’s that for me, in the traditional Christian sense of Jeremy Taylor’s Holy Living and Dying.

And this book is obviously not Christian. So why am I reviewing it?

Because the peak experience of the Tibetan Book of the Dead is the vision of the Clear Light. 

A Clear, Penetrating, No-Nonsense Light that is, naturally, annoyingly enervating to faithless agnostics.

Wakey-wakey, guys!

That’s it, nothing more or less. 

But so FIRMLY embedded in the Western Christian Tradition is that vision - not only nowadays, where we see it recorded in NDE statements by unwillingly resuscitated patients, but in past great lines from our literary canon, like Shelley’s “white radiance of Eternity” or Vaughan’s “I saw Eternity the other night, like a great ring of endless light” - that it’s a part of us.

So the Clear Light experience resonates with us believing Westerners. 

As perhaps it should: for Carl Jung wrote that this, and the entire work that we’re speaking of, is somehow embedded in our Collective Unconscious. And Jung even says its reverse sequence mirrors the process of regaining our true Selves.

And perhaps the Road to Hell?

Now, that’s as it may be, but for me the clincher is eschatological. 

The Book of the Dead is an ancient self-help book aimed at calming the mind before death - if we can believe some accounts, the very time it’s most active. And to Christians its panacea for attaining peace may be summed up in two sentences:

“God (or Jesus) loves me. And HE’s in charge (Demons begone…)!”

This book, in fact, like Christianity, insists on us living a Good Life in order to gain the Ultimate Clear Light experience. If you want to go to Heaven, they say, you’ve GOTTA be good! 

And here we all thought that was too corny.

It’s not. 

It’s dead serious.

And yet that’s exactly what Christ said...

And the Catholics among us see in the Clear Light the classically Thomistic Vision of God.

So where are all these dead folks NOW? Well, as T.S. Eliot replies:

"I am here, there, or elsewhere -
In my Beginning…." the beginning of Good and Evil?
***

But to answer you, dear sometime-girlfriend Maria, once more back in 1971, I would now have to say:

“Yep. This book may be Far out. But it’s no piece of cake. And it’s NOT too far out for me to give it my Best Shot, as my Life’s Principal Quest! Getting there is not so difficult, Maria - IF YOU’RE GOOD.”

So keep your drugs, Ram Dass.

I’ll take plain, ordinary virtue:

The good, old-fashioned, Tried and True way to Heaven.