Rating: 2/5

The USA today seems intent on proving Heinlein right!

As the 21st century comes to a close, Nehemiah Scudder is First Prophet. Once a low IQ itinerant backwoods preacher, he now sits at the pinnacle of a fundamentalist Christian theocracy. It rules the former USA from New Jerusalem, the seat of an oppressive, right-wing government that punishes sin, heresy, blasphemy or even any openly expressed lapses of a doubting faith with all of the awesome power of modern technology, science and even applied psychology or psychotherapy. John Lyle, a young man proud of his recent appointment to the First Prophet’s corps of bodyguards, believes himself to be happy, devout and confirmed in his faith. But when he commits the “crime” of falling in love with one of the Prophet’s brigade of “virgins”, held in thrall for sexual services, he is forced to seek out the help of The Cabal, an undercover resistance movement dedicated to overthrowing the theocracy.

Heinlein posited some thoughts on organized religion, government, power and revolution that were memorably thought-provoking and, if they were relevant in the 1950s, then they are even more important and relevant today:

“You can’t conquer a free man; the most you can do is kill him.”
“You can sway a thousand men by appealing to their prejudices quicker than you can convince one man by logic.”
“Openly expressed piety is insufferable conceit”
“No people was ever held in subjection long except through their own consent.”

But the fact is that Heinlein’s writing in Revolt in 2100 is unable to clear the bar that he set for himself in such later, more polished novels as Methuselah’s Children. It’s blunt, ham-handed and melodramatic, the dialogue is stilted and trite, the romance is juvenile, and the manner in which the otherwise poignant ideas are expressed is in-your-face and over-the-top with nary a single subtle moment in sight.

I’m not sorry that I took a few hours out of my life to read it. Jeff Sessions’ obnoxious recent establishment of a Religious Liberty Task Force (with the openly stated goal of combating "dangerous secularism")in response to the unrelenting pressure exerted by evangelical Christians in the halls of power in Washington make the message more important than ever. And, if a reader is paying any attention to the current events that are unfolding in the world around him, they will realize that Heinlein was nothing, if not prescient, when he penned Revolt in 2100. But, that said, there is still little positive that can be said about the quality of the story itself. Four stars for the message with a grudging single star for the writing brings the novel in at two stars overall.

Paul Weiss