Rating: 5/5

Sabato’s The Tunnel (1948) resembles Camus’ The Stranger (1942), for both are spare, short novels featuring murderer-protagonists as first person narrators, men who are profoundly alienated not only from their societies but also from any meaningful personal relationship. But the two protagonists are very different from each other too. Camus’ hero Meursault, a shipping clerk, is an unimaginative man alienated from his own emotions; Sabato’s hero Castel, a well-known painter, experiences his emotions intensely but projects them all onto a woman, the only woman—he believes—who can ever fully understand him. Meursault’s alienation leads to a murder of indifference, Sabato’s to a murder of obsession.

The reader watches in growing frustration and horror as Castel poisons what might have been a brief, sweet dalliance with a married woman who notices something in one of his paintings he believed only he and his ideal woman could ever see. His relentless, all-consuming hunger for her absolute devotion devours each romantic encounter, draining it of joy, and further intensifying his isolation. Then one day, that isolation blossoms into crime.

This is a fine book about the desperate loneliness of romantic obsession. If such an obsession has ever touched your life, you should find this short novel both disturbing and fascinating.

So why is it called The Tunnel? Sabato—and Castel--explains this metaphor toward the end of the book:

  ...it was if the two of us had been living in parallel passageways or tunnels, never knowing that we were moving side by side, like souls in like times, finally to meet before a scene I had painted as a kind of key meant for her alone, as a kind of secret sign that I was there ahead of her and that the passageways finally had joined and the hour of our meeting had come...What a stupid illusion that had been!...that the whole story of the passageways was my own ridiculous invention and that after all there was only one tunnel, dark and solitary: mine, the tunnel in which I had spent my childhood, my youth, my entire life.