Rating: 5/5

The how-to guide for transiting from this life to the next. In Tibet, the bridge in between is termed "bardo". Very useful for folks like me seeking precision in bardo-crossing :)

Interestingly, the scores of steps on this pathway take upto 5 days. The book was thus compiled so that a family member/priest could direct the spirit through the bardo's confusion. Pure, compassionate, and fearless thoughts are the key to successful transit.

Surprisingly, many Hindu deities are mentioned, though Buddhism is nontheistic and Tibet's language has no Sanskrit base. Circa 28 goddesses represent various emotions one experiences on the bardo. 

I hope future scientific research sheds light on this ancient map.

Notes:
-------------

Six types of bardos :
1. birth
2. dreams
3. meditation
4. samadhi
5. dharmata
6. becoming

You will experience 3 states within a bardo :
1. Moment before death - full of various luminosities
2. Dharmata - full of peacefulness
3. Becoming

The newly dead are addressed as "Oh Child of Noble Family", then given instructions, including:
----------------------------------

"At this time your pleasure and pain are dependent on your own karma."

"The good conscious within you will collect all your good actions like white pebbles, and the bad conscious within you will collect all your evil actions like black pebbles. You will say, 'I have not sinned!' Then the Lord of Death will say: "I will look into the mirror of Karma". All your sins and virtues will appear, clearly and distinctly. The pebbles do not lie, and do not fear the Lord of Death."

"The six realms of light will shine, and the one that shines most brightly due to your previous life's karma is the one you'll be born into."
(SIx hues of Soft Light:)
1. white........... of the gods
2. red.............. of the jealous gods
3. blue............. of human beings
4. green.......... of the animals
5. yellow......... of the hungry ghosts
6. smoky......... of hell-beings

"Those who have not meditated properly will be confused, and quickly look for a womb to re-enter."

"Listen without distraction. Focus one-pointedly and try to close the womb of karma."

"Think: Now when the bardo of becoming dawns upon me, I will concentrate my mind one-pointedly, strive to prolong the results of good karma, close the womb entrance and think of resistance. This is the time when perseverance and pure thought are needed. Do not forget, do not be distracted. Now is the time which is the dividing line between going up or going down. Whatever you concentrate on will come about, so do not think of evil actions. Remember the teachings. Do not forget, do not be distracted. By slipping into laziness, even for a moment, you will suffer forever. Now is the time whereby if you concentrate one-pointedly, you will be happy forever."

.