Rating: 4/5

Enjoyable and fast reading history of Amsterdam by Dutch historian Geert Mak, translated by Philipp Blom. It covers the history from founding through the mid-1990s (published 1994). Has several excellent maps, black and white illustrations throughout the text, a bibliography, and a readable section of notes at the end. 

I really enjoyed how the author would stop during different points of Amsterdam history and describe the sights, sounds, smells of typical life in the city at the at time, noting such as how the city operated at night or what people ate or how they got around, very vivid. Even further, the author would focus on particular people and describe their Amsterdam, notably Wouter Jacobszoon (1522-1595, an Augustinian monk who wrote “the first real diary to come down to us from Amsterdam history,” his account a vivid portrait of religious turmoil), Elsje Christiaens (an 18-year-old woman, newly arrived in the city, executed for murder in 1664, her body hung for all to see and drawn by Rembrandt, the art now in the Metropolitan Museum in New York, discussing what led to her to execution and her life in 17th century Amsterdam), and Jacob Bicker Raye (Amsterdam merchant who kept a diary between 1732-1772, who seemed to like to record how life was really cheap and “led the life of a gossiping civil servant”). 

The author did a great job of noting as a narrative thread the history of Dutch tolerance of different philosophies and religion (going back centuries) but also taking care to note when Amsterdam wasn’t tolerant (particularly during the age of religious wars) as well as noting the “fissure separating the old Amsterdam of God’s Blessing from the new Amsterdam of Good Fortune,” with medieval Amsterdam having its last real moment in the early 1500s. 

The author didn’t lionize Amsterdam and definitely noted when religious fervor and intolerance was dominant for a time, how daily life for centuries could be really tough (with people just starving to death or dying of exposure in full view of others), when after the heights of the Dutch Golden Age in the 17th century Amsterdam became for a time rather provincial and backwater (a “burnt-out world city”), the massive amount of collaboration of the Dutch during the German occupation in World War II, and how a number of collaborators never faced justice while those who were in the Resistance actually faced some stigma. He did praise the city, noting the average person’s love of paintings during the Golden Age, its revival again into a “bustling harbor city,” how democratic ideals and the concepts of the Enlightenment were such an important part of Dutch politics, the vibrant Jewish community prior to World War II, how the Dutch worked together during the Hunger Winter of 1944-1945, and the progressive politics post war as the people debated should it be a museum city or a “modern business city.”

Coverage of how the Little Ice Age affected Amsterdam was fascinating; the “eighteenth century was the century of cold and of the Great Frost.” 

Complaints? A few sections could be a little dry. Some topics only got a few pages such as the Iconoclastic Fury and the Alteration and slavery could have been more extensively discussed. There were passages where the author rattled off the names of Dutch neighborhoods and cities that were unfamiliar to me completely; I still understood the context of what was said as far as larger points, but referencing this small city or that neighborhood rarely meant anything to me. A few times in discussing post-World War II history it almost read like the author assumed I already had familiarity with some of the players and events. At least no extensive chapter discussing football, something some British authors about the Netherlands, Belgium, and Spain feel they need to include.