Rating: 4/5

A Covenant With Death by Stephen Becker from 1964 is a hidden gem of a book that has been compared as a southwestern To Kill a Mockingbird. Taking place in 1923 Soledad City, New Mexico in the early days of statehood and using exquisite prose that we do not often find in contemporary novels, I rate this novel 4.5 stars. 

Ben Lewis Morales is a young judge and is often compared to both his father and the honorable Judge Hochstadter. Day to day life in Soledad City during prohibition is boring on an exciting day, and the profession of judge usually entails reading and writing briefs. That changes one day in May 1923 when Bryan Talbot is charged with strangling his wife Louise to death. Talbot maintains his innocence and employs defense attorney Oliver Parmelee. The state counters with defense lawyer Alfred Dietrich. The case proceeds, according to an older Judge Lewis reminiscing, to make daily life interesting over an otherwise dull summer, and does not end until additional people are dead. 

Yet, what makes this courtroom drama different than contemporary books of this genre, is that we are offered a glimpse into Judge Lewis' personal life. The Judge resides with his professional mother Eulalia Morales Lewis. We see the Judge's struggle to live up to his father's judicial record as well his own personal struggle to find a wife who measures up to his mother's expectations. Becker offers a secondary plot of Judge Lewis learning how to love as an adult versus an adolescent even though he has reached the age of twenty-nine. This sparked my interest as Becker fleshed out Eulalia's character and background so the reader could sympathize with Judge Lewis' quest to find a wife that appeals to both him and his mother. This takes up as much of Lewis' emotional energy as the legal proceedings do. 

I enjoyed reading about Judge Lewis and the other characters of Soledad City. Becker has the judge quote Gibbon, Aristotle, and 1600s French thinkers in his briefs. Meanwhile we learn much about the legal system of the 1920s. New Mexico is a long way from Washington and has state control over most of her legal issues including the court and prohibition. In many ways it is still more of a Wild West society of bandits and Rangers than a member of the United States. It is in this context that Judge Lewis writes his memorable brief on the Talbot case. 

I am glad that I uncovered Stephen Becker. He wrote and translated many books before his death including an award winning biography of Marshall Field. A Covenant of Death was a real find, and even though it is told through the eyes of a 63 year old judge rather than a girl, I can see how the comparisons to To Kill a Mockingbird arose. For its unique perspective and wonderful prose, I rate A Covenant With Death 4.5 stars and look forward to revisiting Stephen Becker's memorable writing.