Rating: 5/5

Etty Hillesum’s extraordinary diary and letters are a chronicle of the Holocaust unlike any other I’ve read. They are devastating, uplifting, and above all distinctive. Her voice comes through so clearly and powerfully, as she initially describes her daily life in Amsterdam and then in the Westerbork labour camp. Her final letter was a postcard thrown from the train that took her to Auschwitz, where she, her parents, and her brother were killed in 1943. As circumstances for Jews in The Netherlands deteriorated, she attempted to protect her family and friends, while retaining an incredible inner strength. Her spirituality appears from her writing quite bible-centric, yet her view of suffering recalled Buddhism. Not that I know a great deal about any religion in particular, but I was strongly reminded of The Book of Joy: Lasting Happiness in a Changing World, a conversation between the Dalai Lama and Archbishop Desmond Tutu. How strange that a book chronicling one of the most horrific crimes against humanity should remind me of such a title! In that dialogue, the essential similarity between Christian prayer and Buddhist meditation is emphasised. Etty Hillesum cultivated habits of introspection and prayer that seem a lot like meditation and her acceptance of suffering while rejecting hatred echoes the Dalai Lama. For example, she wrote in 1942:

Does this mean I am never sad, that I never rebel, always acquiesce, and love life no matter what the circumstances? No, far from it. I believe that I know and share the many sorrows and sad circumstances that a human being can experience, but I do not cling to them, I do not prolong such moments of agony. They pass through me, like life itself, as a broad, eternal stream, they become part of that stream, and life continues. And as a result all my strength is preserved, does not become tagged on to futile sorrow or rebelliousness.

Her diary and letters confront the reader with complex questions about the nature of resistance in extreme circumstances. Etty refused opportunities to potentially escape or hide, despite knowing that if she stayed in Westerbrok she would almost certainly be transported to Poland and killed. Her love of life, even the horribly degrading life inside the camp, did not prevent her accepting death. She clearly wanted to help others for as long as she could, while also having reconciled herself to death’s approach after careful thought. In this respect and others, her diary reminded me of The Journal of a Disappointed Man &amp; A Last Diary, another voice of one long dead that seems so close by as you read their words. Etty wrote this extraordinary passage shortly before being sent to Westerbork:

I shall always be able to stand on my own two feet even when they are planted on the hardest soil of the harshest reality. And my acceptance is not indifference or helplessness. I feel deep moral indignation at a regime that treats human beings in such a way. But events have become too overwhelming and too demonic to be stemmed with personal resentment and bitterness. These responses strike me as being utterly childish and unequal to the fateful course of events.

People often get worked up when I say it doesn’t really matter whether I go or somebody else does, the main things is that so many thousands have to go. It is not as if I want to fall into the arms of destruction with a resigned smile – far from it. I am only bowing to the inevitable, and even as I do so I am sustained by the certain knowledge that ultimately they cannot rob us of anything that matters. But I don’t think I would feel happy if I were exempted from what so many others have to suffer. They keep telling me that someone like me has a duty to go into hiding, because I have so many things to do in life, so much to give. But I know that whatever I may have to give to others, I can give it no matter where I am, here in the circle of my friends or over there, in a concentration camp. And it is sheer arrogance to think oneself too good to share the fate of the masses.

There is so much in Etty’s writing to move the reader and inspire introspection. She rejected binaries and generalisations, always seeking deeper and more nuanced understanding:

A world is in the process of collapse. But the world will go on, and so for the present shall I, full of good heart and goodwill. Nevertheless, we who are left behind are just a little bit destitute, though inwardly I still feel so rich that the destitution is not fully brought home to me. However, one must keep in touch with the real world and know one’s place in it; it is wrong to live only with the eternal truths, for then one is apt to end up behaving like an ostrich. To live fully, outwardly and inwardly, not to ignore external reality for the sake of an inner life, or the reverse – that’s quite a task.

Throughout the diary and letters, Etty found solace in reading, however she emphasised the importance of books for study in pursuit of understanding rather than escape. I found this especially stimulating:

All this devouring of books from early youth has been nothing but laziness on my part. I allow others to formulate what I ought to be formulating myself. I keep seeking outside confirmation of what is hidden deep inside me, when I know I can only reach clarity by using my own words. I really must abandon all that laziness, and particularly my inhibitions and insecurity, if I am ever to find myself, and through myself, find others. I must have clarity, and must learn to accept myself.

Even while falling victim to the horrific murderous system of Nazism, Etty exhibited incredible empathy:

That was the real import of this morning: not that a disgruntled young Gestapo officer yelled at me, but that I felt no indignation, rather a real compassion, and would have liked to ask, “Did you have a very unhappy childhood, has your girlfriend let you down?” Yes, he looked harassed and driven, sullen and weak. I should have liked to start treating him then and there, for I know that pitiful young men like that are dangerous as soon as they are let loose on humankind. But the blame must be put on the system that uses such people. What needs eradicating is the evil in man, not man himself.

Something else about this morning: the perception, very strongly borne in, that despite all the suffering and injustice I cannot hate others. All the appalling things that happen are no mysterious threats from afar, but rise from fellow human beings very close to us. That makes these happenings more familiar, then, and not so frightening. The terrifying thing is that systems grow too big for men and hold them in a satanic grip, the builders no less than the victims of the system, much as large edifices and spires, created by men’s hands, tower high above us, dominate us, yet may collapse over our heads and bury us.

I hardly need to point out the continued relevance of these comments today. 

Perhaps the most powerful theme in Hillsum’s writing is the strength that comes from understanding oneself through a combination of introspection and discussion with a wide circle of loved ones. To read her words 75 years after she was murdered is a reminder of an appalling genocide that must never be allowed to happen again, as well as an insight into the mind of a fascinating, complicated woman who I would love to have known as a friend. She retained her distinctive voice even as the end neared and she wrote, ‘For us, I think, it is no longer a question of living, but of how one is equipped for one’s extinction’. Yet the phrase from the book that most struck me is this: ‘Somewhere deep inside me is a workshop in which Titans are forging a new world’. That's one of the most beautiful expressions of hope that I have ever read. I can hardly recommend Etty Hillsum’s writing highly enough.