Rating: 4/5

A grand tour awaits the delighted, eager fun loving children from Auckland New Zealand's, Charman School 15 boys, from eight to thirteen in age, maybe a couple a year older will be taken on a cruise around the two big islands, a great vacation that will last a few weeks on board a schooner, with a veteran captain in command and a capable crew, get away from the tedious work the never ending boredom of education. But before they begin circumnavigating the colony with all the sailors except one on shore, getting a last few drops of liquid refreshments the captain will begin the voyage at the morning's first light. A peaceful so quiet night descents, the boat is secure tied up by the pier, in the harbor the mate in charge, all is ready and thinking why he too should not partake and join the men in the festivities, leaves the black cook to take care of the young drowsy students, Moko is 12. Something unforeseen occurs the impossible, in the darkness as most of the children are asleep the schooner, Sleuth drifts quietly away from the pier nobody on board notices, it mysteriously travels miles out into the open sea, gently rocking and swaying until alarms by a few still awake arose the other youngsters. Much too late the boat is not paid any attention by various ships, just another schooner floating through being 1860, nothing can communicate their predicament. A fruitless search fails in the morning by the parents, would be crew and other volunteers, debris discovered everyone believes they're lost all New Zealand mourns. A horrific hurricane strikes the luckless kids driving the hapless vessel southeastward, sails are ripped enormous waves crash on deck, winds howling the older boys with hardly any experience, Moko the most knowledgeable technically Briant 14, French, Gordon 13 ( and his dog Fan) American and Donagan 13 British, try to keep the Sleuth from floundering almost falling themselves, into the turbulent water the rest of the passengers below, nervously asking questions and being kept where they will not cause trouble. Many stormy days pass, the weather becomes cold at long last, they spot beautiful land ahead. Somehow the vessel hits a reef becomes stuck, a good circumstance otherwise the schooner would undoubtedly capsize and everyone on board drowned, in the rough seas. The tide goes out and the nimble little boys can walk the quarter mile to the sandy shore, jumping from rock to rock, not feasible ?... later a colossal wave deposits the yacht on the beach. Where what is this place, island , continent the Pacific Ocean is vast, weirdly the temperature starts getting even colder (Antarctica ? ), quickly taking the provisions from the wreck, this will be their new home for the foreseeable future ... But the young students are not afraid, they've read Robinson Crusoe and Swiss Family Robinson. Can little children survive the harsh terrain, freezing winters, find a suitable shelter avoid dangerous animals, supply enough food for substance, and keep themselves healthy and united...They find a human skeleton by a lake on Charman Island ( the castaways are sentimental ), the last previous inhabitant here. A splendid trip on both sea and island that makes happy reading.