In Windhorse Woman, Lynn Andrews' spirit marriage to Windhorse marks the end of the journey she began in Medicine Woman, the story of her search for a marriage basket.

Outside of Kathmandu where the majestic Himalayas thrust their jagged peaks into Nepal's azure sky, Lynn V. Andrews begins a new journey. This odyssey of the spirit will take her to an ending and a beginning: the completion of the circle of learning first described in her wonderful autobiography of her life as an apprentice shaman, MEDICINE WOMAN, and the start of another quest for the truth only reached through struggle on the human path.

Over fifteen years ago, Lynn Andrews became an apprentice to Agnes Whistling Elk, a Native American shaman woman from Manitoba, Canada. Since then, her special mission has been to share with us the discoveries and warnings she has learned. In a time of hate and chaos, her purpose is to teach balance and caring; in an age when humankind is destroying the Earthmother that gives us life, she is to show us the healing powers of female consciousness and the power of primal woman.

Initiated into the Sisterhood of the Shields, a group of 44 shaman women from all parts of the world, Lynn still has far to travel on her spiritual journey. Now, a dream guides her, along with Agnes and Ruby, another Northwest Indian shaman woman, to a remote valley high in the Himalayas. She carries with her a magical gift, a key to help the Sisterhood unlock the knowledge of women that has been hidden for the last 3,000 years. 

But waiting for Lynn is an even more precious kind of gift, a marriage to a man who is both spirit and flesh, herself and yet not herself. Before this, some male energies have been her mortal enemy, like Red Dog, the sorcerer who has tried again and again to destroy her. Now a new male force, Windhorse, is joined in a ceremony of love and passion to the female, Windhorse Woman. This oneness carries with its important lessons for us all: "To fall in love, one must not be afraid to die." "If you are afraid of death, you will not live your life." These thoughts and many more wise, moving and often haunting mind images of desire, death and rebirth fill the reader with their immediacy and raw power.

~ from hardcover dustjacket