THE NEW TESTAMENT LIKE YOU'VE NEVER READ IT BEFORE. When was the last time you really enjoyed just reading the Bible? If it was a while ago (or if you can't remember), then it's time for The Message. The Message brings the original Greek of the New Testament into everyday English-and right into your life. The language is clear, comfortable, and easy to understand-the same real, down-to-earth words you'd use to write a letter or talk with friends. And like a best-selling novel, The Message is a great story that's as practical, relevant, and surprising as the original New Testament was for its first readers centuries ago. So take a look inside-and find out for yourself what a good read the Bible can be! "This edition of the New Testament is just amazing! I feel like I've been reintroduced to Jesus. I'm already recommending The Message to everyone who wants to read God's Word in language that is alive and kicking-including the two teenagers who live right under my own roof!"-Duffy Robbins, youth speaker, author, and Associate Professor of Youth Ministry, Eastern College "Since being given a copy of The Message, I haven't wanted to put it down. I'm always reading on to find out what happens next, and it constantly takes me by surprise. The fresh angle and format of The Message will make you realize your capacity to experience the truth of Jesus in one fell swoop. A must read!"-Amy Grant, Christian recording artist "Sometimes while I'm reading The Message, I catch myself laughing out loud or getting goose bumps. But I have a hunch that that's how the original version of the New Testament affected its readers way back then, too. The Message is a real page-turner."-Wayne Rice, co-founder of Youth Specialties and managing editor of Youth Worker Journal "The Message is the boldest and most provocative rendering of the New Testament I've ever read. If you've become so comfortable with your Bible reading that the Scriptures no longer excite you, then this book is what you need."-Warren W. Wiersbe, author of Be Joyful and Be Real "The Message is original and refreshing. Eugene Peterson has stayed true to the text and yet made it come alive for today's generation. I have already found myself using The Message when I speak."-Jim Burns, president, National Institute of Youth Ministry "Eugene Peterson's blend of accurate scholarship and vivid idiom makes this rendering both distinctive and distinguished. The Message catches the logical flow, personal energy, and imaginative overtones of the original very well indeed."-J.I. Packer, author of Knowing God and professor of theology, Regent College