Continuing Attention to Enduring Issues in Psychology Understanding Psychology, 10th edition highlights the enduring issues that cut across and unite all subfields of psychology- Person-Situation, Nature-Nurture, Stability-Change, Diversity-Universality, and Mind-Body- to show students the surprising unity and coherence of the diverse and exciting science of psychology. This 14-chapter program presents a scientific, accurate, and current overview of the fundamental concepts of psychology in a clear and accessible language, with significant emphasis on applications of psychology. It is current without being trendy. A better teaching and learning experience This program will provide a better teaching and learning experience- for you and your students. Here's *Personalize Learning - The new MyPsychLab delivers proven results in helping students succeed, provides engaging experiences that personalize learning, and comes from a trusted partner with educational expertise and a deep commitment to helping students and instructors achieve their goals.*Improve Critical Thinking - Five enduring themes are woven throughout the text to help students connect ideas across chapters, while critical thinking questions within chapters push students to a deeper understanding of the material. *Engage Students - Applying Psychology exercises in each chapter allow students to connect what they have learned to real-life problems and situations, such as how to use the principles of psychology to tackle environmental conservation. *Explore Research - This introductory book references relevant research reflecting how psychology is both rapidly evolving and remaining the same. Using the Experiment's Tool in the new MyPsychLab, students participate in classic experiment simulations to experience the research process firsthand. *Support Instructors - This book is supported by Pearson's unrivaled instructor resources for introductory psychology, including the new 17 episode MyPsychLab video series, an expansive class-tested Test Bank, interactive PowerPoints, an easy to use Instructor's Manual, Clicker questions and support for a broad range of learning management systems.All of these materials are available to be packaged with the text upon request. MyPsychLab does not come automatically packaged with this text. To purchase MyPsychLab, please www.mypsychlab.com or you can purchase a ValuePack of the text + MyPsychLab (at no additional cost): ValuePack 0205843387/ ValuePack 9780205843381.