From the authors of the phenomenal bestseller Protein Power comes a quick, easy-to-follow low-carb diet plan designed to get you on the fastest possible track to losing weight, feeling fantastic, and improving your health. If you've heard all the recent publicity about how low-carb eating can turn your health around--by keeping your insulin levels down and getting your excess weight off--but don't want to wade through hundreds of pages of explanation or complicated formulas before you get started, The 30-Day Low-Carb Diet Solution is for you. Unlike any other low-carb diet book in the market, this book gives you low-carb 101: the basics of low-carb eating without all the fuss.

In this much-needed book, two of the most trusted names in low-carb dieting who have helped millions of readers lose weight provide the simplest possible diet designed for the best possible results. Drs. Michael and Mary Dan Eades give you the step-by-step basics-what to eat, what to avoid--and even provide specific low-carb meal plans to guide you at breakfast, lunch, dinner, and snacks for a full month. For those who would rather design their own meals, they include expert advice for easily creating a customized plan based on your current weight, health status, and goals. They show you the exact portions of carbohydrate-rich foods you can enjoy now to reach those goals and how to increase those amounts to maintain your health and weight for the long haul.

Simply by knowing your height, weight, and gender, you can quickly determine how much protein to eat for optimal health-no complicated measurements, charts, or formulas to follow. The Drs. Eades include everything you need to get started now: self-assessment quizzes to help you effortlessly tailor your program to fit your needs, fill-in worksheets for planning meals and tracking your progress, and other important nutritional information for easy reference.

By following the simple but highly effective and powerful diet in The 30-Day Low-Carb Diet Solution , complete with 30 days of meal plans and more than 100 delicious and easy recipes, you'll be on your way to a thinner and healthier you in just a month!