We all need a little magic in our lives. And Sophia is here to show the way. With more than 50 incantations guaranteed to turn up the heat, The Little Book of Hot Love Spells is perfect for starting up a new relationship or renewing an old one. "Heat of fire, heat of lust. Grant our desire. Guide us you must!"Sophia's Little Book of Love Spells was published in 1997 and has sold more than 52,000 copies, proving there's a huge market for unusual books on love and relationships. The Little Book of Hot Love Spells fills the bill. Some examples of Sophia's sexy spells in this charming new volume  Hot Lips Spello I'm Hot Spello Hot Dreams Spello Hot-to-Trot Spello Hot Rub Spello Hot Rocks Spello Hot Hot Hot! SpellFrom cover to cover, The Little Book of Hot Love Spells gives readers fun and mystical ways to conjure up desire. Or as Sophia says, "If some part of your life is humdrum, ho hum, repetitive, dry, gray, or boring . . . do something about it tonight! Move on! Move up! Try something new! Do it! (A spell that is!)"The Little Book of Hot Love Spells will appeal to everyone who wants a little more love in their lives-whether they're young or young at heart. We all need a little magic in our lives. And Sophia is here to show the way. With more than 50 incantations guaranteed to turn up the heat, The Little Book of Hot Love Spells is perfect for starting up a new relationship or renewing an old one. "Heat of fire, heat of lust. Grant our desire. Guide us you must!"Sophia's Little Book of Love Spells was published in 1997 and has sold more than 52,000 copies, proving there's a huge market for unusual books on love and relationships. The Little Book of Hot Love Spells fills the bill. Some examples of Sophia's sexy spells in this charming new volume  Hot Lips Spello I'm Hot Spello Hot Dreams Spello Hot-to-Trot Spello Hot Rub Spello Hot Rocks Spello Hot Hot Hot! SpellFrom cover to cover, The Little Book of Hot Love Spells gives readers fun and mystical ways to conjure up desire. Or as Sophia says, "If some part of your life is humdrum, ho hum, repetitive, dry, gray, or boring . . . do something about it tonight! Move on! Move up! Try something new! Do it! (A spell that is!)"The Little Book of Hot Love Spells will appeal to everyone who wants a little more love in their lives-whether they're young or young at heart.