This limited edition facsimile  reprint volume is a complete reproduction of the original first edition (published by 
Gnome Press in 1953) and includes a full-color dust jacket, protective slipcase, and biographical information about the author.

Hidden throughout a future America of 1972 are a group of incredibly gifted children. All roughly the same age, all 
preternaturally intelligent, and all hiding their abilities from a world they know will not understand them. They are Wilmar Shiras Children of the Atom, the results of an unintended experiment in genetic mutation. Born to workers caught in an explosion at an atomic weapons facility, these remarkable youths were orphaned just a few months after birth when their parents succumbed to delayed effects from the blast. Now they are in their early teens, scattered across the country, each unaware of the others existence.

But beginning with the introduction of 13-year-old Timothy Paul to school psychiatrist Dr. Peter Welles, all that is about to change. After identifying Timothy and his fellow prodigies for what they are and for what their potential might be Dr. Welles commits himself to gathering these Wonder Children into an experimental new school, both to harness their intellectual abilities and to protect them from the jealous suspicions of the normal  population. At this new Academy, teachers and students alike throw themselves into discussion and learning, laying the groundwork for what they hope will become a rich new chapter in human history. But once the Children of the Atom are all in one place, keeping their existence a secret becomes more and more of a challenge, and escalating events soon force a reckoning not only among the Wonder Children themselves, but also with the larger society that lies just outside their sanctuary's walls.

And although it was to be the only book that Shiras would publish in the genre, Children of the Atom has earned its author an honored place among science fiction's pantheon of creators in 2002, the Science Fiction Book Club named it one of the Most Significant Science Fiction and Fantasy Books of the Last 50 Years. Shiras passed away in 1990.