IS YOUR LIFE FILLED, YET UNFULFILLED? Do you feel pulled in a thousand different directions? Are your days and weeks so busy you hardly have time to think? Does your schedule seem totally out of control? Have you been trying to live up to everyone else's expectations while your own plans and dreams go unfulfilled? Then let The On-Purpose Person show you how to discover-and accomplish-what's most important to you! Tap into your highest potential with The On-Purpose Person! Nothing adds more fullness and meaning to life than discovering your purpose and living it out seven days a week! With The On-Purpose Person, you'll be on your way to discovering your life's purpose within half an hour of picking up the book! Presented in an entertaining story format, its principles are clear and easy to apply. You'll find yourself translating them into practice immediately-whether you're still in your teens or are well into retirement. "The simplicity and directness of this book really hit those of us who are striving for balance in our lives. Living the balanced "on-purpose" life requires the kind of structure and encouragement that are provided here."-Steve S. Reinemund, president and CEO, Pizza Hut "The secret of success  Do more of what you're good at and less of what you're not good at. That's what The On-Purpose Person is all about."-Stanley C. Olsen, cofounder, Digital Equipment Corp., developer, Black Diamond Ranch "What a refreshing book! The On-Purpose Person should take its rightful place in every thinking person's bookcase."-Michael Gerber, CEO, The Michael Thomas Corporation, and author of The E Myth "The On-Purpose Person is the book to read before you read What Color Is Your Parachute?"-John W. Rosenblum, dean, The Darden School "The best tool I've seen for turning good intention into positive actions. Highly recommended for anybody, but especially for those who need a way to organize unstructured time-like clergy!"-Bishop William C. Frey, dean, Trinity Episcopal School for Ministry "In my psychiatry practice, I see many patients struggling to find themselves. I help them focus on their assets and get moving-much like The On-Purpose Person does. The only difference is that I use psychiatric jargon, attach labels, and charge fees. What Kevin is doing, if it were to become well-known, would put me and other psychiatrists like me out of business."-Walter J. Muller, III, M.D., The Group for Psychiatry, Psychology, and Social Services "Many books assert that one must have a goal to be happy and successful. The On-Purpose Person is the first one to show me how to determine what my goals should be."-Thomas P. Page, attorney at law, Mateer, Harbert & Bates, P.A.