"Another delightful cozy with a congenial cast of diverse characters, a realistic heroine with a vivid sense of humor and a loveable cat!"—Publishers Weekly“I've read and liked every one of the books in this series. PLEASE WRITE MORE!!” –Karen GoodreadsLiterary agent Jane Stuart lives a page-turner when a murderer gives new meaning to the phrase buried in books and girls begin to disappear.Jane couldn't turn down her nanny's sister when she needed a place to stay. Crystal Ryerson turns out to be more than a handful. In two short weeks as the new assistant director of the Shady Hills Public Library, Crystal proves herself to be trouble no matter how you spell it. A pain. Yes. Popular. No.SMASHING Still, it's a shock when at the next meeting of Jane’s book club at The Shady Hills Public Library, book shelves come crashing down and topple on poor Crystal. Who knew reading could be fatal? Detective Stanley Greenberg makes a grim the bolts on the bookcase had been deliberately removed—by someone who was at the meeting.Prime suspects line Crystal's Realtors, Myrtle Lovesey and Dick Stanton, the recently fired school librarian and more. It’s not as clear cut as that, thinks Jane, who suspects something else is going on. Then the body of a beautiful teenager is found in the woods behind the railroad tracks. She worked at the Library. And then two other girls go missing…BONUS This edition contains an excerpt from MISSING MARLENE by Evan Marshall.REVIEWS OF CRUSHING CRYSTAL 3.63 average rating all editions, 55 ratings, 7 reviews, added by 126 people, 38 to-reads, 87% of people liked it.--Goodreads3.5 out of 5 stars (10 reviews).--Amazon“It hooked me enough on a bad day that I spent the better part of the day finishing it.”—Aaron Wallentine, Goodreads"Pretty good, liked the way they "took out" the busybody!”—Janet, Goodreads"Engaging...Jane proves a shrewd sleuth."—Publishers Weekly"Bubblegum for the eyes.....enjoyed it though. Very witty."—Cindy, GoodreadsABOUT EVAN MARSHALL Evan Marshall is president of The Evan Marshall Agency and author of The Marshall Plan For Novel Writing (Writer’s Digest, 1998), an international bestseller on novel writing now in its 20th anniversary edition. He is the author of 10 commercially published mysteries including Manhattan Mysteries and Jane and Winky Suburban Sleuths series, named “Miss Marple Lite” by Kirkus Reviews. His books appeal to fans of Janet Evanovich, Lilian Jackson Braun, Agatha Christie and Alexander McCall Smith. You can reach him at evan@evanmarshallagency.com.