Trained in Mayan Soul Retrieval and Sacred Sound Medicine, Peace Mother Geeta Sacred Song is recognized as a Holy Woman, who has been donated by the Celestial and Earth Forces to bring healing balance to Mother Earth and all humanity through her power-full Prayer Songs, Sacred Ceremony and Teachings. In this profound book, Peace Mother reveals the secrets to protecting your happiness, strength, relationships, health, children, prosperity and your very soul! Every spiritual tradition has birthed Impeccable Warriors of Light, those beings who chose to take FULL responsibility for their state of being. Their mission on Earth is to wholeheartedly serve the Forces of Light, the Positive Spiritual Principles, with steadfast devotion to the Forces of Good. To accomplish this, they master the invocation of Grace for Spiritual Protection from the negative forces. Enliven your Spiritual Path by walking this Earth as an Impeccable Warrior of Light. These Wisdom Teachings awaken you to the absolute necessity of greater spiritual protection; bestowing awareness of the infinite ways sinister forces sabotage your wholeness by lodging in the mind, body, spirit or home. Your eyes will be opened to the REAL cause of humanity's suffering and the power that resides within YOU, as Peace Mother demonstrates an abundance of quick, practical and power-full antidotes to strengthen your psychic shield. You can break the chain of suffering IMMEDIATELY with these energetic techniques which will increase your faith, shift your consciousness and empower you to dissolve obstacles or dangers from your path. Regardless of your religion or your spiritual beliefs, this ancient knowledge will heighten your connection to your true Spirit Guides and the mystical language of the Universe! Awaken to your Highest Destiny! Today, Peace Mother gifts you profound and sacred tools to help you dream the BIG Dream, sing the BIG Song, pray the BIG Prayer, carry the BIG Faith and radiate BIG Love and Peace into EVERYONE and EVERYTHING!