Susan Allen Toth's love affair with England is a long and happy one. Her books *testaments to undiminished affection *are designed to help readers discover the rich and beautiful land for themselves. Now her love affair continues in England for All Seasons, an experienced traveler's journal that captures the lively pleasures of offbeat exploration all year round.

With whimsy and a trenchant eye, Toth first takes her readers through a London they might otherwise miss. She suggests ways to uncover the city's overwhelming variety of theatre, music, and other cultural events *as well as just plain fun. From directing the route to the most scenic London buses to bargain-hunting and splurges to out-of-the-way places and personal walking tours of eccentric museums, Ms. Toth will entice even a seasoned London visitor into new adventures.

Outside London, England for All Seasons traverses the country, including forays to Wales and Scotland, from the estuaries and rivers of Cornwall to the lonely beaches of Anglesey to the wild sea-lochs of Mull. In her fascinating tour, Ms. Toth also stops at many of England's great gardens, a donkey sanctuary in Devon, an outdoor sculpture museum in the seacoast resort of St. Ives, and a modernist castle on the edge of Dartmoor.

Readers who already know England will cherish the author's affectionate and humorous observations on glorious desserts ("the irresistible sweet trolley"); the unacknowledged pleasures of a rainy climate; and the need for survival techniques in museums. First-time visitors can look forward to a quintessentially English experience, with an abundance of surprises along the way.

Whether looking for literary landscapes or the most delicious sherry trifle, Susan Allen Toth illuminates the nooks and crannies of a multifarious culture, the vibrant real England that every Anglophile dreams of finding. At once entertaining and contemplative, England for All Seasons is as delightful a travel companion as your liveliest, most trusted friend.