"I have written for you the book I wish had been available to me twenty years ago and to my mother forty years ago, and to her mother before that." That's a very different way to begin a book about parents and children, but it reflects Louise Hart's deep conviction that each generation has a powerful effect on subsequent generations. To alter or lessen this effect, parents must decide what outcomes they want and actually change what they can to bring that about. Self-esteem is a great gift that every parent can give to or develop with their children. This comprehensive and supportive book offers a new, hopeful model for families, one characterized by joy and satisfaction. Reviews:"Uniquely inspiring, accessible, and non-guilt-provoking!"-Mothering Magazine"I like this book!"- Dr. Berry Brazelton, Pediatrician and Author of Touchpoints"A wealth of forthright information"-Parenting Magazine"Life is a labor pain. This book can help you be a successful midwife to self-creation."-Bernie Siegel, author of Love, Medicine, and Miracles"The Winning Family is a book you will return to again and again for Hart's reassuring words, lighthearted confidence in the love of parents for their children, and down-to-earth ideas about making the parenting journey a path of self-discovery."-Julianne Idleman, Hand in Hand Parenting"This is 'must reading' for all caregivers of children. I read it cover-to-cover in one day."-Sandra Gellert, National Association for Family Day Care"As a parent educator for 28 years I have read every parenting book available. This is still the best book there is and I continue to use it as the textbook for my parenting class. It has changed so many lives! To this day, it is the number one book I recommend to families."-Nevin Valentine, Napa Valley College"A must for parents who want to have healthy children."-Dr. Patricai Palmer, clinical psychologist and author of Teen Esteem; The Mouse, the Monster, and Me; and Liking Myself"Practical and insightful. A super book!"-Dr. Christopher Green, pediatrician and author of Toddler Taming"At last there is a book that goes beyond parenting to focusing on the personal development of parents along with the development of their children."-Jeanne Gibbs, author of Tribes"Never has a book been so meaningful and timely! It has all the essentials: theory, practicality, application, and passion for kids. Self-esteem must start with the family, and The Winning Family needs to be in every home."-Dr. Michele Borba, author of nineteen books"The Winning Family is a winner!" -John Vasconcellos, Assemblyman, Sponsor of the California Self-esteem Task Force"This book covers in a very insightful way all of the major stumbling blocks which lead to major dysfunctions in nuclear families."-Constance Jones, Professor of Sociology, Mills College"As an elementary school guidance counselor, The Winning Family is the number one book I recommend."-Celeste, elementary school guidance counselor"I use this book all the time in counseling suicidal teenagers. I have several copies so I can use them at home with my own children. My copies are all marked up from constant use."-Dr. Don Burchfield"This book has become our second Bible."-Linda, mother and student"This is a great book. Easy to read and understand. It will change your life."-Karen, Amazon reviewer"Even with two small children under the age of 3, I read this book in only a few days. I couldn't put it down, and when I did I couldn't wait to pick it up again!"-Lisa, mother"My husband and I were on our way to separating. But since reading this book we have worked through so many of our problems. It has saved my daughters from growing up with divorced parents."-Tiffany, mother"I am a recovering alcoholic and this book has helped me very much. My self-esteem has really gone up, and so have my boys. We are able to love each other like never before. I keep this book very close and study it daily along with the Big Book of A.A. So with my Higher Power and these powerful books I'm able to face life on life's terms."-Anonymous