In her introduction to The Funny Side: 101 Humorous Poems, editor Wendy  Cope laments the invention of the term "light verse", arguing instead that the best funny poems  deliver spice and substance both. In this diverse assemblage of witty yet weighty poems, she  more than proves her point. As painlessly as a dentist pulls a tooth while turning up the gas,  normally cheerless subjects--alcoholism, suicide, mortality, love gone wrong--leave us chortling  with delight. In Connie Bensley's "Mr and Mrs R and the Christmas List", for instance, the  tiresome chore of sending Christmas cards is the perfect vehicle for expressing anger over an  affair gone sour:     Ah, that heart-stopping moment 			by the kitchen sink, when he took off   			his spectacles and fiercely kissed me. 			But all that lasted less than a week  			And what I recall more vividly 			is Mr R's good advice:  			Always plunge your lemons in hot water 			before you squeeze them.		  			One more year perhaps.  	 Along with the relatively solemn, Copes includes the best of the purely whimsical. In the  especially keen-witted "Three Riddled Riddles" by Martyn Wiley and Ian McMillan, the  tiresomely ubiquitous riddle poem is transformed into something infinitely more interesting:  			I taste like a grapefruit. 			I swim like a chair. 			I hang on the trees 			and people tap my face, 			rake my soil 			and tell me jokes.  			Who am I?  			Answer: I've really no idea.  Parodies like John Witworth's ("They f-ck you up, do publishers..."), jocular jabs (a news item  proclaiming the remains of Rameses II were "met"at Orly airport leaves Edwin Morgan no choice  but to pen an imaginary conversation between Mme and mummy), and the inclusion of humorist  immortals Dorothy Parker and Ogden Nash all add up to a devilishly clever collection. As Simon  Rae instructs in "Ode on a Goal":  			Savor simply the sublime control 			Like angels performing rock 'n' roll 			On the dance-floor of a pinhead. Extol 			That goal! --Martha Silano