Retiring rich is much easier than you think!  Bestselling author James O'Shaughnessy shows you the simple way to create the fully funded retirement you deserve.

Most Americans today think they're in good financial shape and are looking forward to a comfortable retirement.  But watch out!  Even if you have a flourishing career and can afford two cars and several vacations a year, the numbers in your savings and retirement plan don't always add up to a wealthy--or financially secure--future.

As investment wizard James O'Shaughnessy points out, in a time when all of us are painfully aware of shrinking Social Security and health care benefits, investing in your future is more important than ever.  But with so much investment information readily available and hordes of money managers pitching their latest theories and methods, how do you know which investment strategies are winners and which are losers?

Now, in this groundbreaking book, O'Shaughnessy applies his revolutionary analysis of the Standard & Poor's CompuStat Database to identify exactly which strategies have consistently beaten almost all active stock pickers over the past four decades--and are capable of transforming yearly $2,000 IRA contributions into more than $4 million over time.

O'Shaughnessy's advice is  Don't buy stocks based on hunches, hot tips, or trendy advice from high-profile gurus who rely too much on gut instinct.  Instead, look at the stock market's history and apply the proven formulas that won't leave you vulnerable.  By adopting O'Shaughnessy's logical, consistent approach to investing, you can dramatically increase your net worth without falling prey to fears about current market conditions and jeopardizing your financial future.

Offering invaluable advice on everything from savings, to investing, to your 401(k), O'Shaughnessy tells you how to get the information you need and shows you how to develop a portfolio that's tailored to your age, financial situation, and long-term needs.  His winning strategies are often so simple that they can fit on the back of a business card, making it easy for in-vestors at every level to see how these strategies will affect their overall financial picture and start putting them into practice.

Packed with hard-core investment information and expert advice on common traps to watch out for, How to Retire Rich shows how regular folks can learn the basics of investing and get on the road to a wealthy future.  After decades of long hours and stress at work, don't
you deserve to retire in style?