The Barnes & Noble Review You hated the ugly lamp your aunt gave you and your now-husband, so thanking her would be pointless. Your best friend threw you a terrific wedding shower but you told her how much you loved it the next day on the phone, so you can save yourself the cost of a stamp and the energy of writing her a note. Right? Forget it. You get married, you receive presents, and you follow THE BRIDE'S THANK YOU GUIDE's two golden rules: Write thank-you notes to everyone and send them out promptly! Divided into three parts — Some Questions Answered, Writing the Note, and Sample Letters — each section of this simple book will help you conquer the daunting thank-you- note writing task. Although pre-printed thank-you notes abound, Some Questions Answered stresses the importance of hand written letters to the guests as well as ushers, bridesmaids, and anyone else who really helped you during this special time. Author Pamela Piljac also explains how to create an effective file-card system, what type of stationary should be used, and whether you or your future spouse's name should appear on personalized stationary. Now that you know you can't weasel out of writing the letters, you need to figure out what to say. Writing the Note provides a general outline of what details need to go into a thank-you. THE BRIDE'S THANK YOU GUIDE includes some adjectives like stunning, eye-appealing, and multipurpose, for describing gifts that will help you after you have composed your 15th note and your ideas have become stale. This section also addresses what to do in the etiquette-challengingsituationthat the marriage does not take place or is annulled quickly. The final section, Sample Letters, is just that. Pijac's 60 letters serve as great models for every wedding gift-scenario. The Returned Gift note is the perfect solution for the gift you don't like, and the wording is diplomatic: "We'd like to thank you for the attractive table lamp you sent. It was an interesting choice, and we appreciate the time you must have spent selecting it." And while you probably will be able to write a letter from the heart to your parents, there is a sample note that can act as merely a reminder to formally thank Mom or Dad. So be the model of perfect etiquette and begin writing your notes of thanks. —Soozan Baxter