"Out of his vast sea of culinary lore, famed gourmet James A. Beard has drawn a giant haul of information on how to recognize, treat and cook fishes, mollusks and crustaceans of every variety and description -- from New England cod to Moroccan snails. Mr. Beard divides the sea creatures of the world into: Salt-water Fish, including well-known specimens like halibut and salmon, as well as stranger denizens like grunion, pompano and barracuda; Fresh-water Fish, ranging from trout to buffalo fish; Shellfish, such as abalone, conch, oysters and scallops; and assorted rare delicacies like Russian caviar, frogs' legs, snails, turtles, tortoises and terrapin. In each case he briefly sketches the fish's haunts and habits, and gives an expert's instructions for baking, broiling, frying, poaching, or otherwise preparing it for the table. And he suggests the vegetables, salads or other accompaniments most suited to these dwellers in the deep -- be they humble or exalted, exotic or familiar. An especially valuable feature of Mr. Beard's book is the introductory section on the general approach to buying, cleaning and cooking the various type of fish; on the sauces, essences and court bouillons so necessary to the preservation of delicate fish flavors; on stuffings and dressings of diverse nature -- and on the concoction of the delicious and subtle sea broths known as fish chowders and stews."-- taken from book jacket flaps from one of the earliest releases.

book history:
1954   book released
1967   new covers (there are few different ones)
1969   slightly different cover issued by Paperback Library
1976   book revised, new title, cover, and illustrator
1987   new cover
1994   new cover – this will be used for the e-books later on
1996   new cover
2009   book is released as an e-book                                  

note about the author:
Books would be released not only as "James Beard", but also "Jim Beard" and "James A. Beard". "Jim Beard" is what his books were first published under.