Research shows that over fifty percent of all business decisions fail; sixty percent of all businesses fail before the sixth year, and eighty-two percent go under before their tenth anniversary; and eight out of every ten new products fail. In direct contrast, research also shows that ninety-one percent of all businesspeople are as confident as ever in making decisions. Decision confidence is up. Success is down. While we are an inventive, entrepreneurial society, an innovation explosion has also been tagged with a business implosion. What gives? businessThink is a revolutionary new method that bridges the monumental gap between the results businesses and people want and the failure they often get. This book is the only business training that tomorrow's leaders will need to consistently create effective solutions and take themselves and their associates into the zone of optimum performance. businessThink transforms readers into businessthinkers with provocative new rules for accelerating work while revitalizing the enterprise. With rules like "Check Your Ego at the Door," "Move Off the Solution," "Get Evidence," and "Create Curiosity." businessThink promises to significantly increase results by delivering hard core business thinking and fusing it with high intuition and emotional intelligence that open up, rather than shut down, thinking and collaboration. Effectively blended, these skills become the new business intelligence that is needed to get it right-no matter what. FranklinCovey is the world's premier leadership development organization, whose client portfolio includes eighty-two of the Fortune 100 companies and more than two-thirds of the Fortune 500 companies. With 45 offices in 38 countries, FranklinCovey employs 3,500 associates. Dave Marcum has a unique blend of management experience with positions ranging from VP of Sales & Marketing, to Chief Operating Officer in the publishing industry, to Business Transformation Leader at FranklinCovey, a 500 million dollar company. Dave is a respected authority in complex sales and has worked with companies across the globe like EDS, Andersen, Microsoft, and Accenture. Steve Smith has two degrees in management and psychology. He has been a human resources manager inside a Fortune 500 company, an entrepreneur starting his own consulting firm, and head of development of FranklinCovey's The 4 Roles of Leadership. He has presented management programs to clients such as Nike, Hard Rock Cafe, and the U.S. Air Force. Mahan Khalsa is a world-renowned expert in business development, whose clients include Arthur Andersen, Microsoft, and Walt Disney. He graduated with honors in economics from UCLA and has an MBA from Harvard. Mahan is Vice President of the Sales Performance Group at FranklinCovey Co.