How investing in high-tech can make you rich--even if you don't understand the technology

How do you find the next Netscape or Intel?  How can you avoid losing your shirt on start-up companies that suddenly fizzle and die?  And how can techies and non-techies alike get the edge on Wall Street's booming high-technology sector?

Whether the stock market is enjoying an explosive bull run or retreating in the face of a possible bear market, the world of high-tech has become the most important investment opportunity of our time.  Now, in Every Investor's Guide to High-Tech Stocks and Mutual Funds, Michael Murphy shows that you don't have to be an engineer or research scientist to do well in technology stocks.  From software to communications to biotech, Every Investor's Guide to High-Tech Stocks and Mutual Funds provides refreshingly clear, jargon-free analysis of the seven key technology industries, sharing coveted insider tips and wisdom that will supercharge your portfolio's results.

Focusing on long-term investment strategies--including the easy-to-use Growth-Flow strategy that has made Murphy's California Technology Stock Letter one of the top-rated investment publications in the world--Murphy answers frequently asked questions and guides readers through the dos and don'ts of putting your money into high tech.  Got the inside scoop on an upstart software company or a great no-load fund that has skyrocketed in the past six months?  Murphy shows you how to evaluate opportunities, decipher industry hype, and pick your shots with care.  Unsure if you should heed the experts' warnings about the economy and the oncoming investment slump?  Murphy offers sure-fire techniques for knowing when to invest--and when to get out.  Simply trying to fund a comfortable retirement?  Murphy examines a variety of stock and mutual fund options and helps you assess which ones best suit your needs.

Whether you're investing in Blue Chip stocks or convertible bonds, this groundbreaking book provides essential information on how to build a technology portfolio, how to calculate the downside risk of any investment, and how to apply Murphy's unique, proven Growth-Flow model to maximize your returns.  With detailed company profiles, stock performance records, and contact information for twenty-six of the best technology mutual funds, as well as forecasts for the next five years, Every Investor's Guide to High-Tech Stocks and Mutual Funds arms individual investors with everything they need to cash in on the current technology boom and beat the Dow in the stock market's hottest sector.