Anne’s daughter Faith is the answer to her lifelong prayer to be a mother. But her dream is shattered when the teenager rejects Anne’s love and the love of God. After years pass, and God heals their relationship, Anne falls seriously ill. Faith watches her mother weaken, struggling with role reversals and leaning on God as never before. Through all the intricacies of their relationship, all the joys and trials, they learn that God is with them. He brings them peace in the darkness, joy in the midst of sorrow, and hope in the face of death. A Mother…

Anne knew God would answer her fervent prayers for a baby. That’s why, when her daughter was born, she named her Faith. But as Faith grows into a teenager, mother and daughter rarely see eye-to-eye about anything—including God. When Faith erupts in rebellion, Anne’s world is shattered. Now Anne must leave her precious daughter in God’s hands. A Daughter…

By God’s grace, Faith survived a turbulent youth—a terrible time when she hurt those she loved most. Faith has since grown close to her parents, especially her mom. But then her mother falls seriously ill. As Anne weakens, Faith struggles with the reversal of their roles. Though she finds strength in God, fear is her constant nemesis. Will God answer her prayers as He did her mother’s?

And the God Who Loves Them Both.

A Test of Faith explores the intricacies of the mother-daughter bond and celebrates the rich, enduring love that often flourishes. Follow these two women through a lifetime as they learn to surrender their relationship and dreams to God—and trust that His love and faithfulness are unending.

Story Behind the Book

I hope to give women a sense of celebration in this wonderous connection God has given us with our mothers and daughters, to help them releate to each other in a more healthy and biblical manner. To find joy in our differences and to find ways to praise God together for all He’s given us. This is a story that comes from my own experiences and will address issues I’ve seen Christians struggle with for years. This is an honest, sometimes difficult, and yet ulitmately encouragin and uplifting book.